GIEWS Country Brief
South Sudan
Reference Date: 09-May-2017
FOOD SECURITY SNAPSHOT
 Famine declared in parts of former Unity State
 About 5 million people estimated severely food
insecure until July 2017
 Crop production declined in 2016 due to insecurity
and displacement of farmers
 Localized early season dryness and protracted
insecurity affecting 2017 first season crops in
southern bi-modal rainfall areas
 Food prices at exceptionally high levels

Famine declared in parts of former Unity State
According to the latest IPC analysis, localized famine conditions
are currently reported in former Unity State, with a caseload of
about 100 000 people in IPC Phase 5: “Catastrophe” in former
Leer and Mayendit counties. In addition, there is an elevated risk
that famine is occurring also in former Koch County, but it cannot
be confirmed due to limited available evidence, while in former
Panyijiar County famine has been avoided so far only through
humanitarian assistance operations.
Nationwide, food insecurity has escalated during the last three
years due to conflict, violence, macro-economic collapse and
exhaustion of households’ coping mechanisms. Between
February and April 2017, about 4.9 million people, over
40 percent of total population, are estimated to be severely food
insecure and this figure is projected to reach 5.5 million people at
the peak of the lean season in July. Although most food insecure
people are concentrated in the Greater Upper Nile Region, food
security has drastically deteriorated in former Northern Bahr el
Ghazal State and the Greater Equatoria Region.
Since the start of the conflict in mid-December 2013, according to
OCHA, about 3.8 million people were forced to flee their homes
due to insecurity, including about 1.97 million IDPs, with about
217 000 people in UNMISS Protection of Civilians (PoC) sites
across the country and 1.83 million people that fled into
neighbouring countries (Uganda, the Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Ethiopia and Kenya).

Below-average crop production estimated in
2016 due to insecurity and displacements
Harvesting of the 2016 main season crops was completed in
January. According to the preliminary results of the FAO/WFP
Crop and Food Security Assessment Mission (CFSAM), the

GIEWS global information and early warning system on food and agriculture

overall production, including first season crops harvested last
July/August, for 2016 is estimated at a below-average level of
825 000 tonnes, about 10 percent below the previous year’s
output. Despite favourable rains across the country, except in the
eastern Greater Kapoeta Region, crop production has been
severely affected by increasing displacements and insecurity,
following the renewed conflict in July, that disrupted agricultural
activities, including harvesting. In particular, the area planted with
second season crops in the “green belt” has been well-below the
average, with most households being able to cultivate only small
plots near homesteads, mainly with vegetables.
In southern bi-modal rainfall areas, planting of first season crops,
to be harvested from July, has just been completed. Seasonal
rains had a timely onset in the third dekad of March.
Subsequently, rains in April were average to above-average in
the “green belt”, including former Central and Western Equatoria
states. By contrast, in the former Eastern Equatoria State,
accumulated rainfall in April was about 40 percent below
average, with a negative impact on planting activities and on the
germination of early-planted crops. According to the latest
weather forecast by the Greater Horn of Africa Consensus
Forum (GHACOF), rains in May will continue to be above
average in southwestern and central areas and below average in
southeastern parts. Agricultural activities continue to be affected
by the protracted and widespread insecurity, which is
constraining access to fields and is causing large-scale
displacement of people, input shortages and damage to
households’ productive assets.

Prices of cereals at exceptionally high levels
In the capital, Juba, prices of sorghum and maize declined in
January 2017 by 3 and 7 percent, respectively, partly as a result
of the harvesting of the 2016 second season crops in southern
bi-modal rainfall areas. In February, prices resumed their
increasing trend, surging by 50-55 percent between February and
April and reaching new record highs. Prices of other important
food staples followed similar patterns, with wheat and cassava
prices increasing by 45-56 percent between February and April
and prices of groundnuts more than doubling over the same
period. Overall, in April, staple food prices in Juba were between
two and more than five times their levels in April last year, due to
insecurity, a tight supply situation, hyper-inflation and a significant
depreciation of the local currency.

GIEWS global information and early warning system on food and agriculture

