SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook

October 2017 to May 2018

Significant risk of Famine (IPC Phase 5) will persist into 2018
FEWS NET produces forward-looking food security analysis and IPC compatible mapping several times a year for more than 30 countries,
including South Sudan. FEWS NET is a member of South Sudan’s multi-stakeholder IPC Technical Working Group and an active participant in
national IPC analysis workshops in South Sudan. The map and classifications in this report use IPC standards and methods, but do not necessarily
reflect a consensus view of the national IPC Technical Working Group, IPC partners, or the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. However,
this report was reviewed by the South Sudan IPC Technical Working Group prior to publication. The most recent national IPC analysis was
conducted in September 2017 and the next analysis is expected to convene in January 2018.

KEY MESSAGES
Current food security outcomes, October 2017



Widespread food insecurity occurred during the peak
of the 2017 lean season (July/August), with some
households experiencing an extreme lack of food
equivalent to Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5). Data from
Round 20 of the Food Security and Nutrition
Monitoring Systems (FSNMS) and corroborating
evidence from key informants suggests Greater Baggari
of Wau, Leer of Unity, Ayod and Nyirol of Jonglei, Tonj
North and Tonj South of Warrap, Rumbek North and
Yirol West of Lakes, and Kapoeta East of Eastern
Equatoria were the most likely locations of significant
Phase 5 populations during this period. However, data
suggest that Phase 5 populations may have been
present in as many as 19 counties.



Based on the recently released IPC analysis, an
estimated 4.8 million people are currently in Crisis (IPC
Phase 3) or worse. Though it is the harvest period,
worst affected households, particularly IDPs who were
unable to plant, likely remain in Emergency (IPC Phase
Source: FEWS NET
4) or Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5). The area of greatest FEWS NET classification is IPC-compatible. IPC-compatible analysis follows key IPC
but does not necessarily reflect the consensus of national food security
current concern is Greater Baggari of Wau where two protocols
partners.
rapid assessments have suggested levels of acute
malnutrition above the Famine (IPC Phase 5) threshold, but little corroborating evidence is available.



Food insecurity is expected to be more severe during 2018 than during 2017, as conflict persists, macroeconomic
conditions further deteriorate, and households’ capacity to cope continues to erode. By the middle of 2018, more than 6
million people are likely to require emergency food assistance. Even if assistance continues at current levels (reaching
roughly half of the food insecure population), Famine (IPC Phase 5) remains possible in 2018 given the severity of
outcomes during 2017, the expected deterioration in underlying conditions over the coming year, and the possibility of
conflict-related restrictions on assistance delivery and population movement. In a worst-case scenario, characterized by
the extended absence of humanitarian assistance, Famine (IPC Phase 5) would be likely in many areas of the country.
Areas of concern include Central Unity, northwest Jonglei, and Wau of Western Bahr El Ghazel. Conditions in Lakes and
Warrap are also increasingly of concern.



Given the continued risk of Famine (IPC Phase 5), large-scale, multi-sector assistance, above 2017 levels, is needed
urgently to save lives. These assistance flows should be complemented by commitments by all parties to facilitate
humanitarian access. Further, urgent action to end the conflict is needed.

FEWS NET South Sudan
fewsinquiry.southsudan@fews.net
www.fews.net/ethiopia

FEWS NET is a USAID-funded activity. The content of this report does not
necessarily reflect the view of the United States Agency for International
Development or the United States Government

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook
Some households currently in Catastrophe
(IPC Phase 5) and a credible risk of Famine
(IPC Phase 5) remains in 2018
Data from the FSNMS collected in July/August 2017
indicate some households in several counties of
South Sudan were likely in Catastrophe (IPC Phase
5) at the peak of the lean season. Although
moderate improvements are expected with the
ongoing harvest, food security will again decline in
early 2018, and the upcoming lean season is likely
to be more severe than in 2017. Some households
are expected to be in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5)
throughout the projection period and Famine (IPC
Phase 5) remains possible even in a scenario of
continued assistance at current levels. Areas of
greatest concern include Wau, northwestern
Jonglei, and central Unity, though given the
severity of food insecurity across South Sudan and
unpredictable nature of conflict, the possibility of
Famine (IPC Phase 5) should be considered in many
states of the country. In a worst-case scenario of a
complete absence of humanitarian assistance,
Famine (IPC Phase 5)1 is likely.

October 2017 to May 2018
Figure 1. Area level (>=20% households reporting) food
consumption outcomes at the peak of the lean season, July/August

Source: FSNMS data

FSNMS data showed that households across the country faced large food consumption gaps, and in some cases an extreme
lack of food in July/August 2017. In nearly every county, more than 20 percent of the population reported a Poor Food
Consumption Score (FCS) indicating that very few food groups had been consumed in the past week. In 19 counties more than
20 percent of the population reported a Severe Household Hunger Scale (HHS)2, indicative of large or extreme food
consumption gaps (Figure 1). Nutrition data from SMART surveys conducted between June and September also indicate that
very high levels of acute malnutrition are wide-spread (Figure 2). In at least 12 counties, the prevalence of Severe Acute
Malnutrition (WHZ) was 4 percent or higher. Mortality data show mixed results, though in several counties excess mortality
was reported.
In Greater Baggari of Wau, where regular assistance delivery has not been possible since early 2017 due to access constraints,
MUAC screenings, from Inter-Agency assessments conducted in August and September, found GAM (MUAC) between 25 and
38 percent, far above the 17 percent Famine threshold for GAM (MUAC). Food security and mortality data are not available
for this area, but 25 cases of oedema were observed in August, and 13 cases in September, among an under-five population
estimated between 4,000 and 7,600 children. There is an Elevated Risk that a Famine (IPC Phase 5) is ongoing in this area, but
available evidence is insufficient to confirm or disprove.3
According to IPC protocols, humanitarian assistance must be planned, funded, and likely in order to be considered in the
projection of food security. Given that humanitarian assistance plans for 2018 are not yet known, this evidence is not
currently available. In a worst-case scenario where no humanitarian assistance is provided, Famine (IPC Phase 5) would be
likely in many areas of the country. Many households would be unable to meet their basic food needs through own
production or market purchases, as many have depleted livelihood assets over the past four years, eroding the capacity to
cope further. Some households would likely face restrictions to moving in search of alternative food sources. These limitations
in accessing food, in combination with the impacts of four years on conflict on the nutritional and health status of many
households in the country, would likely result in extreme food gaps, high levels of acute malnutrition, and significant excess
mortality.

1

According to the IPC, a Famine (IPC Phase 5) has occurred when at least 20 percent of households in a given area have an extreme lack of food, the Global Acute Malnutrition (GAM) prevalence,
as measured by weight-for-height z-score (WHZ), exceeds 30 percent, and mortality, as measured by the Crude Death Rate (CDR), is greater than 2 per 10,000 per day. Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5)
is when a household group has an extreme lack of food and/or other basic needs even with full employment of coping strategies.
2
HHS is an experiential indicator and a strong proxy of diet quantity. A severe HHS is indicative of large or extreme food consumption gaps.
3
This classification is in concurrence with the professional judgment of the IPC Emergency Review Committee, but not in accordance with the minimal evidence requirements of the IPC Protocols

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

2

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook
Despite, the lack of current evidence on 2018
humanitarian assistance delivery plans and
funding, past experience suggests that
significant deliveries of food aid will
continue. In recent years, large-scale
humanitarian assistance has been delivered
to South Sudan on a monthly basis,
increasing from approximately 1 million
beneficiaries a month in 2015 to roughly 2.53.0 million beneficiaries a month in 2017.
Although the number of beneficiaries
reached is still far below the 6 million people
estimated to be in need, it is likely that
assistance is preventing more extreme
outcomes in many areas.

October 2017 to May 2018
Figure 2. Recent malnutrition and mortality outcomes, from FSNMS and
SMART surveys, June to September 2017

CES
EES

Lakes

NBeG

GAM (WHZ)
(95% CI)

SAM (WHZ
(95% CI)

Non-trauma CDR
(10,000/day)

Juba

14.6% (6.3-30.4%)

3.1% (0.5-18.2)

N/A

Terekeka

6.5% (2.7%-15.2%)

1.9% (0.4- 8.5)

N/A

Kapoeta North

17.3% (13.9-21.4)

4.5% (3.2- 6.4)

0.98

Kapoeta East

28.1% (13.8-48.9)

8.3% (2.6-23.8)

N/A

Kapoeta South

16.9% (13.3-21.3)

2.8% (1.7-4.6)

1.43

Torit

12.2% (8.8-16.6%)

1.6% (0.8-3.1)

1.58
N/A

Rumbek East

19.0% (CI NA)

5.9 % ( 4.4-7.7)

Yirol East

16.7% (12.4-22.1)

5.8% (2.5-12.9)

N/A

Yirol West

17.7% (14.3-21.6)

2.5% (1.6-4.0)

0.37

Aweil Center

23.3% (19.6-27.5)

6.3 % (4.6-8.5)

0.21

Aweil North

15.8% (8.9-26.5)

4.0% (1.2-12.7)

N/A

However, even in a scenario of continued
Aweil South
15.7% (8.9-26.2)
4.1% (1.1-4.0)
N/A
assistance at current levels, Famine (IPC
Aweil West
17.3% (8.4-32.1)
3.6% (1.1-11.6)
N/A
Phase 5) remains possible, as evidenced by
Aweil
East
24.6%
(15.6-36.3)
8.5%
(2.7-23.3)
N/A
extreme outcomes observed at various
Malakal
PoC
15.2%
(11.2-20.2)
2.6
%
(1.5-4.3)
0.39
UNS
points during 2017. In several counties
Panyijiar
13.2% (10.1-17.2)
2.5% (1.4-4.4)
1.13
where humanitarian assistance was present,
Unity
one or more of the food security and
Gogrial
West
22.8%
(18.8-27.5)
2.8%
(1.4-5.8)
0.15
Warrap
nutrition indicators approached or surpassed
11.4% (8.4-15.2)
Twic
35.9% (31.7-40.4)
1.29
its Famine (IPC Phase 5) threshold. In other
Akobo
18.0% (14.5-22.3)
4.3 % (2.7-6.7)
0.54
Jonglei
areas, like Central Unity in early 2017,
Ayod
16.2 % (13.3-19.6)
3.6 % (2.3-5.6)
1.77
though assistance programs were present in
Bor South
16.1% (12.4-20.7)
2.2% (1.1-4.0)
0.54
the country, conflict prevented food aid
Nyirol
25.7% (22.4-29.3)
3.2% (2.1-4.8)
0.44
delivery in specific areas, contributing to a
Jur River
18.8% (12.6-27.2)
5.8% (2.2-14.6)
N/A
WBeG
rapid decline in food access. In 2018,
Raga
15.7% (10.1-23.7)
4.5% (0.9-20.1)
N/A
outcomes could be even worse given the
Wau
13.2% (10.4-16.7)
1.0% (0.5- 2.3)
0.75
persistence of conflict, further deterioration
in macroeconomic conditions and the
Source: Various agencies; see footnotes4
exhaustion of households’ coping capacity.
Given the continued possibility of Famine (IPC Phase 5), large-scale assistance above 2017 levels is needed urgently to save
lives. Furthermore, commitments to facilitate humanitarian access and urgent action to end the conflict are also needed.

NATIONAL OVERVIEW
Current Situation
For nearly four years, conflict has persisted throughout South Sudan and its impacts continue to limit household access to
food and income. Households’ capacity to cope is noticeably declining, and recent assessments indicate many areas of the
country are in Emergency (IPC Phase 4), and some households are in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5). According to an analysis of
FSNMS data from the lean season, Phase 5 populations may have been present in as many as 19 counties. Among these,
corroborating evidence including key informant information indicates Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) likely occurred in Greater
Baggari of Wau, Leer of Unity, Ayod and Nyirol of Jonglei, Tonj North and Tonj South of Warrap, Rumbek North and Yirol West
of Lakes, and Kapoeta East of Eastern Equatoria. It is likely Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) is still occurring in some counties.
Levels of Global Acute Malnutrition (GAM), as measured by weight-for-height z-score (WHZ), observed during the lean season
were ‘Critical’ (GAM (WHZ)>=15%) in nearly all areas of the country, and in some places mortality rates, measured by Crude

4

IMC: Panyijiar (Sept. 2017), Malakal PoC (July 2017),Akobo (June 2017); State Ministry of Health: Wau (Sept 2017); FSNMS: Juba, Terekeka, Kapoeta East, Rumbek East, Yirol East, Aweil North,
Aweil South, Aweil West, Aweil East, Jur River, Raga (July/Aug. 2017); SCI: Kapoeta North (Aug. 2017); Torit (Aug. 2017), Bor South (July 2017), Kapoeta South (Aug. 2017), Nyirol (Sept. 2017;
Doctors with Africa: Yirol West (June 2017); Medair: Aweil Center (July 2017); ACF: Gogrial West (June 2017); RMF: Ayod (Sept. 2017); WVI: Twic (Aug. 2017)

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

3

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook
Death Rate (CDR), exceeded 1/10,000/day. In Twic of
Warrap, for example, GAM (WHZ) was 35.9 percent
(31.7-40.4), above the 30 percent Famine threshold,
Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) (WHZ) was 11.4
percent (8.4-15.2), and the non-trauma CDR was 1.29,
indicative of Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes. In
Greater Baggari of Wau County, where food security data
is unavailable but MUAC screenings found GAM (MUAC)
between 25 and 38 percent in August and September, far
above the 17 percent Famine threshold for GAM (MUAC),
and 25 cases of oedema were observed in August and 13
cases in September, among an under 5 population
estimated between 4,000-7,600.

October 2017 to May 2018
Figure 3. Conflict density, July 1 to October 20, 2017

In October, food security has improved somewhat with
the harvest and seasonal increases in natural food
sources. However, some households did not plant and
conflict continues to limit food security improvements
even during the harvest.
Conflict-related events have occurred in all states in
recent months (Figure 3). In Jonglei, insecurity in Ayod
and armed clashes in parts of Nyirol and Aboko East are
limiting households’ ability to move in search of natural
foods and the ability of humanitarian actors to deliver
assistance. Armed conflict in Pagak in Maiwut of Upper
Nile and Nhialdiu in Rubkona of Unity State has disrupted
trade flows and the delivery of assistance to both areas.
Of extreme concern is Greater Baggari in Wau of
Western Bahr el Ghazal where an estimated 20,00038,000 people face severe restrictions to movement due
to insecurity, limiting their ability to cultivate, search for
wild foods, or moved towards Wau town for assistance.
Insecurity is also preventing the regular delivery of
assistance in many other areas. In Warrap and Lakes,
inter-communal conflict persists and has been relatively
higher in recent months than in early 2017.

Source: ACLED data

Figure 4. External displacement by country of arrival, as of October
2017
2,500,000

2,000,000

1,500,000

1,000,000

500,000

In addition to limiting trade flows and delivery of
assistance, conflict has limited the capacity of many
households to produce their own food. Conflict continues
Kenya
Ethiopia
Sudan
DRC
Uganda
to drive large-scale displacement, and the majority of
those fleeing the country are leaving Greater Equatoria
Source: UNHCR data
for Uganda (Figure 4). This drastically limits the
production capacity in South Sudan’s grain basket. Furthermore, conflict has limited household level production by restricting
access to farms for the fourth consecutive season. This impact has been greatest in Yei, Lainya, and Kajo-Keji of Central
Equatoria, Torit and Magwi of Eastern Equatoria, and Greater Mundri and Mvolo of Western Equatoria. Cultivation for the
main season in Greater Bahr el Ghazal and Greater Upper Nile has also been impacted by insecurity and it is estimated that
production is well below pre-crisis levels in many areas. FSNMS data indicate most households in conflict-affected areas are
harvesting less than three months of cereal, and only slightly more in relatively stable areas. Furthermore, infestations of Fall
Armyworms (FAW) were reported in all regions and are likely resulting in some crop losses, though the scale of the impact has
not been assessed.

Conflict and the lower international oil price are both driving extremely poor macroeconomic conditions in South Sudan. The
production of oil, South Sudan’s primary export, is now occurring only in Paloich of Upper Nile. Production is estimated at
130,000 barrels/day, down from 160,000 barrels/day in early 2017 and 350,000 barrels/day prior to the outbreak of conflict in

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

4

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook
2013. With limited alternative sources of revenue,
foreign currency earnings have reduced even further
than pre-July 2016 levels. Consequently, the South
Sudanese Pound (SSP) has further depreciated against
the United States Dollars on the parallel market, from
76 SSP/USD in October 2016 to 182 SSP/USD in
October 2017.
Across the country, trade flows and market
functioning are occurring at lower levels than
normal/pre-December 2013 (Figure 5). This is in part
due to limited access to USD, which has made it
difficult for traders to import food. In many areas,
though, physical insecurity is also limiting trade flows
and households’ physical access to markets. Despite
military escorts between Juba and Nimule, trade
flows to Juba remain below pre-July 2016 levels, and
maize flour imports in mid-2017 were roughly 75
percent below last year. In Central Equatoria, the
trade route connecting Yei and Kaya was reopened in
early October, though trade flows remain minimal. In
Western Equatoria, many trade routes remain closed
due to insecurity and banditry. In Greater Upper Nile
and Greater Bahr el Ghazal, limited activity is
occurring on most trade routes due to combination of
insecurity and seasonal constraints, as the rainy
season limits road functioning.

October 2017 to May 2018
Figure 5. Market and trade functioning, October 2017

Source: FEWS NET

Figure 6. Retail price of white sorghum compared to unofficial exchange
rate
450

0.05

400

0.045
0.04

350

Oct-17

Sep-17

Jul-17

Aug-17

Jun-17

Apr-17

May-17

Mar-17

Jan-17

Feb-17

Dec-16

Oct-16

Nov-16

Sep-16

Jul-16

Aug-16

Jun-16

Apr-16

May-16

Mar-16

Jan-16

Feb-16

SSP per 3.5 kilograms

0.035
As a result of low supply, high transportation costs,
300
0.03
and the depreciation of the SSP, staple food prices
250
0.025
remain extremely high, around seven to ten fold the
200
0.02
five-year average, despite the ongoing harvest. In
150
Juba, the retail price of a kilogram of sorghum
0.015
100
increased 98.8 percent from the same time last year.
0.01
50
In Wau, the price increased 43.7 percent over the
0.005
same time period. In these markets, prices continue
0
0
to climb above levels observed during the July 2016
price spike (Figure 6). In Aweil, the retail price of
white sorghum has increased slightly compared to last
Juba
Aweil
Wau
Unofficial exchange rate (USD/SSP)
year, though the price declined sharply between
August and September due to reduced market
Source: WFP data, UN Operational Rates data
dependence with the harvest and the influx of
assistance in recent months. Though market dependence is typically lowest at this time of year, given that some households
will harvest little to no food, there is still high dependence on markets to access staple foods. High food prices have sharply
reduced household purchasing power, and a day’s labor currently purchases under 3 kilograms of sorghum in most markets.
An individual needs more than a half a kilogram of cereal to consume daily kilocalorie requirements, and 3 kilograms is
insufficient for the daily needs of a typical household size of 7 people. Furthermore, households are not accessing labor
opportunities daily. Rapid market assessments conducted by FEWS NET in Yei, Rumbek and Torit indicate that most
households are purchasing small quantities of cereal with income earned that day.

Food security has improved slightly compared to outcomes observed during the lean season. It is assumed most households
have access to at least some cereals from the harvest. However, some households did not harvest and household ability to
produce, purchase, or move in search of sufficient food is still well below average, and given that acute food insecurity has
persisted for several years, households’ capacity to cope is declining. Crisis (IPC Phase 3) and Emergency (IPC Phase 4)
outcomes persist and areas of greatest concern include Western Bahr el Ghazal, central Unity, Jonglei, Upper Nile, Warrap,

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

5

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook

October 2017 to May 2018

and Lakes. Among counties where households were likely in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) during the lean season, it is expected
some households are still in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5), specifically displaced households who were unable to cultivate and
move in search of assistance. In Greater Baggari, there is an elevated risk that Famine (IPC Phase 5) is currently ongoing, but
evidence is insufficient to confirm or deny.

Assumptions
The October 2017 to May 2018 most likely scenario is based on the following national-level assumptions:


Despite efforts to revitalize the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan (ARCSS), and
the arrival of the first-batch of the Regional Protection Force (RPF) in the capital, intermittent clashes between
Government forces and armed opposition groups are likely to continue given past trends that armed clashes continue
even as peace negotiations are were being held.



Armed clashes will lead to further internal and external displacement. The number of South Sudanese refugees in all
neighboring countries is likely to increase, most significantly in Uganda, though the daily rate of arrival to Uganda will
likely be lower than in late 2016 and early 2017, in line with recent trends. The number of IDPs is not expected to change
significantly despite further displacement as some IDPs will leave the country and become refugees.



Given conflict-related disruptions to oil production, South Sudan’s oil production will remain at current level of 130,000
barrels per day. This and continued fluctuations in global oil prices will limit Government earnings of USD from oil exports.
Other sources of foreign currency, including proposed World Bank donations, are not guaranteed. With limited USD
earnings, it is expected the SSP will continue to depreciate even further against the USD. This will limit access to USD for
food and fuel imports, driving higher food prices.



Based on FEWS NET price projections in key reference markets of Wau, Juba, Bor, and Aweil, the retail price of staple
foods are expected to remain extremely high throughout the outlook period, surpassing prices observed last year and
remaining well above their five-year averages. This is driven by the expectation of below-average harvest at national
level, volatile trade flows throughout the country, and depreciation of the local currency.



The 2017/2018 harvest is expected to be lower than last year and below the five-year average, with significantly belowaverage production in some counties in Greater Equatoria, Western Bahr el Ghazal, and Greater Upper Nile, due to the
above mentioned conflict-related disruptions, massive out-migration of the population, and crop losses from the reported
Fall Armyworm (FAW) infestations. FAW’s impact is expected to be greatest in Greater Equatoria. Given the nature of the
FAW, it is also likely to spread to other areas.



Based on forecasts from NOAA and USGS, the March to May rains in Greater Equatoria are forecasted to start on time
and be average. Despite this, area cultivated will be well below pre-crisis levels due to expected conflict related
disruptions and low access to seeds and tools, as households have sold some assets to cope with current food insecurity
and face high seed prices.



WFP plans to distribute emergency food assistance to an average of 3.3 million beneficiaries (roughly 60% of the
population in need) a month between October and December, and deliver a total of 22,540 MT. Although assistance is
likely to reach many beneficiaries, past trends have shown that insecurity can often disrupt the consistent delivery of
assistance and it is therefore assumed that the delivery of this assistance is not guaranteed in conflict-affected areas.



Assistance in 2018 is not yet planned or funded. Despite this, past experience suggests that significant deliveries of food
aid will continue. It is assumed assistance will continue at similar levels as observed in 2017, though it is also recognized
that – following past trends - assistance will likely reach only half of the population in need and will be regularly disrupted
by conflict in various areas.

Most Likely Food Security Outcomes
Only marginal improvements in food security are expected between October 2017 and January 2018. Most households
throughout the country reported planting, though yields are expected to be well below normal and households will remain
dependent on markets, fish, and wild foods to meet their basic food needs. In addition, many displaced households were
unable to plant and therefore will not benefit from the harvest season. Continued extremely high food prices will limit the

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

6

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook
ability of households to purchase sufficient food and
ongoing conflict will also restrict the frequency with which
households can move in search of wild foods and fish.
Planned and funded assistance during this time period will
likely reach a high number of beneficiaries but will fall far
short of the need and many households will continue to
face food consumption gaps. Emergency (IPC Phase 4) or
Crisis (IPC Phase 3) will persist in all regions. In Greater
Baggari of Wau, where the worst-affected households are
not expected to have access to a harvest and conflict is
significantly limiting movement in search of alternative
sources of food, most households will remain in
Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) and an elevated risk of Famine
(IPC Phase 5) persists.
Between February and May, food security will deteriorate
even further as households deplete their food stocks and
are unable to purchase sufficient food at extremely high
prices. The exceptions to this are Abeyi and Maban where
food security will improve slightly with the long-cycle
sorghum harvest. In most areas, continued insecurity will
limit some households from accessing wild foods and fish.
These food sources will also seasonally decline during this
time, and given the expectation that macroeconomic
conditions will also further deteriorate, food security
outcomes are expected to be more extreme than during
the 2017 lean season. Crisis (IPC Phase 3) or Emergency
(IPC Phase 4) outcomes are likely in all states and
households are likely to be in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) in
Kapoeta East, Yirol West, Ayod, Nyirol, Leer, and Wau,
though it is possible such outcomes could exist in
additional areas, including Lakes and Warrap where
outcomes have consistently deteriorated.
Levels of Global Acute Malnutrition (GAM (WHZ)) will
remain at ‘Critical’ levels (>=15 percent) in most areas of
the country based on assumptions of below-average
access to food and nutrition services and trends observed
in 2017 that showed the persistence of high levels of GAM
during the harvest and lean seasons. Excess mortality, as
measured by CDR, is expected throughout the outlook
period and as was observed during the 2017 lean season.
CDR is expected to exceed 1/10,000/day in some areas
between February and May 2018.

October 2017 to May 2018
Projected food security outcomes, October 2017 to January
2018

Source: FEWS NET

Projected food security outcomes, February to May 2018

Source: FEWS NET

Even in a scenario of continued assistance at current levels, Famine (IPC Phase 5) remains possible, as evidenced by extreme
outcomes observed at various points during 2017. In several counties where humanitarian assistance was present, one or
more of the food security and nutrition indicators approached or surpassed its Famine (IPC Phase 5) threshold. In other areas,
like Central Unity in early 2017 or Greater Baggari currently, though assistance programs were present in the country, conflict
prevented food aid delivery in specific areas, contributing to a rapid decline in food access. In 2018, outcomes could be even
worse given the persistence of conflict, further deterioration in macroeconomic conditions and the exhaustion of household’s
coping capacity. Given the continued possibility of Famine (IPC Phase 5), large-scale assistance, above 2017 levels is needed
urgently to save lives. In a worst-case scenario, characterized by the extended absence of humanitarian assistance, Famine
(IPC Phase 5) would be likely in many areas of the country.

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

7

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook

October 2017 to May 2018

AREAS OF CONCERN
Western Bahr el Ghazal State: Wau and Raja
Current Situation
In both Raga and Wau, insecurity continues to cause
displacement and disrupt normal livelihoods. An
assessment conducted by REACH in July estimated
30,000 people are displaced in Timsah, Bor Medina, and
Deimzuber. In Wau, a report by IOM and UNOCHA in
July 2017 estimated 60,000 IDPs have been registered in
POCs and various IDP sites in Wau town. Of greatest
concern is Greater Baggari, to which IDPs from areas
further south and west fled in an attempt to reach Wau.
An estimated 20,000-38,000 people are currently
residing in Greater Baggari, according to inter-cluster
assessments between August and September, and
movement out of the area is significantly limited.
Furthermore, roads into Greater Baggari are no longer
functioning for the delivery of assistance or market
stocks. Markets in Baggari, Basillia, Ngissa, and
Ngovendengo were destroyed during a series of recent
armed clashes and are no longer functioning. As a
result, food availability within Greater Baggari is very
low, and to a lesser extent, food stocks are also low in
greater areas of Wau and Raga.
FSNMS data indicates that 95 percent of households in
Raga and 72 percent of households in Wau planted for
the season, though ground information indicates
cultivation only took place near homesteads due to
insecurity and lower than normal access to seeds and
tools. Furthermore, FAO crop watch reported the
presence of FAW in these counties and some crop
losses are expected as a result. In Ngobenogo, Ngissa,
Mboro, Ngodagalla, and Farajallah – all of which are
within Greater Baggari – key informant information
reports that cultivation was minimal to none, around 1
feddan or less per household.
Supply routes from Sudan and Juba to Wau are
functioning, though supply levels are lower than last
year due to combination of high cost of transport, poor
road conditions and banditry. Similarly, few traders are
bringing supplies to Raja due to both insecurity and
seasonality. Market supplies in this county are well
below normal, though key informants did report that
some sorghum, cassava, simsim, and groundnuts from
local production are available on markets.

Figure 7. Area of concern reference map, Wau and Raga of
Western Bahr el Ghazal

Source: FEWS NET

Figure 8. Food security outcomes at the peak of the lean season,
August 2017, according to FSNMS round 20
Food Consumption
Score

Household Hunger
Scale

Wau

21.3% borderline;
76.6% poor

42.6% moderate; 34.0%
severe
(4.3% HHS = 6)

Raga

25.9% borderline;
65.9% poor

78.8% moderate
2.4% severe;
Source: FSNMS

Figure 9. Nutrition and oedema results in Greater Baggari
August 23-26
Proxy
GAM
(MUAC)

Proxy
SAM
(MUAC)

Oedema

Mboro

38.1%

16.7%

Ngissa

24.7%

Farajalah

34.4%

September 20-22
N

Proxy
GAM
(MUAC)

Proxy
SAM
(MUAC)

Oedema

3.6%
(16)

436

34.7%

13.6%

.02%
(2)

6.1%

1.5%
(9)

510

8.3%

0%

520

N

889

Didn’t access
25.8%

8.6%

.07%
(11)

1480

Source: Interagency Assessment

In Wau town, the retail price of sorghum was 98.8 percent higher than last year and by 405.7 percent above the five-year
average. It is expected that prices in Raja are similarly high. In normal years, households would earn income through the sale
of crops, fish, livestock, firewood/charcoal, and honey during this time in order to purchase food from the market. Given that
these income-earning opportunities are significantly lower than normal and food prices remain extremely high, household
food access is very low.

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

8

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook

October 2017 to May 2018

Insecurity and poor physical road conditions continue to limit the delivery of humanitarian assistance to rural areas in Wau
and Raga. No humanitarian assistance has been delivered to Raja since June 2017. In Wau, large-scale humanitarian assistance
has been consistently delivered to populations displaced in Wau PoCs and within Wau town, though assistance to wider areas
within Wau remains limited. Of great concern is Greater Baggari, to which humanitarian actors have not had regular access
since March 2017, due to ongoing conflict. Access has only been granted to for short windows of time in August and
September and during a period of access in September, they were able to distribute a 15-days ration to 16,683 people. Given
that this assistance was distributed over a month ago, and the high likelihood that beneficiaries shared their assistance with
others in need, it is assumed this assistance has been depleted.
Extreme food security outcomes existed in Wau and Raja during the lean season. In Wau, FSNMS data reports that 76.6
percent of households had a poor FCS and 34.4 percent had a severe HHS, both indicative of Emergency (IPC Phase 4). Five
percent of households in Wau reported an HHS of 5-6, indicative of an extreme lack of food (Figure 8). Only households in
accessible areas in and near Wau were surveyed, and these households are likely able to access some assistance and harvest,
and it is therefore unlikely households from this population are currently in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5). However, it is possible
there are worse-off households in inaccessible areas of Wau, where Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) is possible. Food security has
not improved significantly with the harvest and Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes are expected currently in both Raga and
Wau, though humanitarian assistance is preventing more extreme outcomes in Wau town and PoC. In Greater Baggari, it is
expected some households are in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5). The most recent Inter-cluster assessment in late September
reported that households had an extreme lack of food, face restrictions moving in search of food or assistance, and are coping
through eating wild yams and groundnuts in nearby areas. As indicated in the national overview, GAM (MUAC) results from
these assessments far surpassed the 17 percent Famine (IPC Phase 5) threshold for GAM (MUAC) (Figure 9). During the
assessment in Mboro in late September, it was indicated by respondents that of the 16 cases of oedema recorded in August,
some had died while others fled for treatment in Wau. There is an elevated risk Famine (IPC Phase 5) is occuring, but evidence
is insufficient to confirm or deny.

Assumptions
In addition to the national-level assumptions above, projected food security outcomes for the counties of concern in Western
Bahr el Ghazal are based on the following assumptions:


Based on past trends, armed clashes are expected to persist in these counties. Further displacements to Wau Town and
Raga Town are expected.



Based on FEWS NET’s price projection for Wau market, the retail price of sorghum is expected to be higher than last year
and well above five-average, around 110-120 SSP/kg, throughout the outlook period. Similar prices are expected in Raja.



Trade routes to and from Wau and Raga are expected to remain open, but trade flows will be low and volatile due to
ongoing insecurity along these routes. As a result, market supplies will likely remain as low as last year. Few to no markets
are expected to function in remote and conflict-affected areas of Wau and Raga, including Greater Baggari.



IDPs in Wau PoC and poor households in Wau and Raga towns are expected to earn some income through the sale of
casual labor and are likely to earn around 400 – 500 SSP per a day. With this income at projected terms of trade, it is
expected most households will be able to purchase roughly 3.5-5 kilograms of sorghum a day, below what is sufficient to
meet the daily caloric requirements of a household of seven. However, in Greater Baggari and remote areas of both
counties where there are few to no income-earning opportunities and limited physical access to markets, it is assumed
little to no food will be accessed through market purchases.



Access to fishing grounds is expected to remain restricted. The consumption of fish, income from the sale of fish, and fish
supplies on markets will remain below average throughout the outlook period. Households displaced to Wau town are
expected to have average access to fish, though, given near normal access to Jur River.



Income from agricultural and casual labor is expected to still be below average throughout the outlook period. This
assumption is based on key informant information and FSNMS data, which reported 46.5 percent of households in Wau
and 8.7 percent of households in Raja have lost these sources of income.

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

9

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook

October 2017 to May 2018



It is expected households displaced to remote areas are likely to have access to some cassava, hunting, and gathering of
wild foods throughout the scenario period, with the exception of Greater Baggari where movement is restricted and
access to these food sources will be very limited.



WFP plans to distribute emergency humanitarian assistance to an average of 55,821 people a month in Wau between
October and December. It is assumed this assistance will be delivered to individuals in the PoC and within Wau town and
surrounding areas, given past trends of fairly regular access to these areas. Assistance delivery outside of these areas is
unlikely. Assistance is planned and funded for Greater Baggari, but it is not likely to be delivered. This is based on reports
from humanitarian actors who indicate they are unlikely to have regular access to the area. No assistance is planned for
households in Raja during the outlook period.

Most Likely Food Security Outcomes
Between October and January, food security will improve slightly among rural household in Wau and Raga who planted and
are currently accessing a harvest. Long-cycle sorghum, which is normally harvested in December, will be depleted as early as
January. IDPs and host households are likely to rely on the few accessible natural food sources including game meat, fish, and
wild foods, in addition to some harvests and food purchased from daily labor. Despite these slight improvements, food
consumption gaps will continue during this time period, as all food and income sources remain far below what is normal and
sufficient to meet basic needs. Between February and May, food security will further deteriorate as households will have
depleted their harvests and natural sources of food further decline. For those who are able to access wage rate labor and have
access to a market, daily wage rates would allow for sufficient food purchases if households purchase the cheapest staple
cereal, though labor is not available to all households and not available every day. Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes are
expected in both counties throughout the projection period. In Greater Baggari, households are expected to continue to have
little or no access to harvests, wild foods, or markets. Based on the assumption that humanitarian assistance will not be
regularly delivered to this area, most of the area is expected to face extreme lack of food and be in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5).
Throughout the outlook period, an Elevated Risk of Famine (IPC Phase 5) exists in this area.

Unity State: Leer, Mayendit, Koch, and Panyijiar
Current Situation
Armed conflict continues in central Unity, where over 250,000
people remain internally displaced. The majority of these
people were displaced in 2014 and 2015, though new and
secondary displacement has occurred throughout 2017.
According to July/August FSNMS data, 85.3 percent of surveyed
households in Leer and 75 percent in Koch reported insecurity
as the key shock disrupting normal livelihoods and trade flows
in these areas. In northern Mayendit, some households have
fled from Thaker, Tutnyang, and Rubkuay payams to
neighboring counties due to the presence of armed groups.

Figure 10. Area of concern reference map, Leer,
Mayendit, Koch, and Panyijiar of Unity State

The ongoing harvest is estimated to be below average due to
repeated internal displacement, as well as prolonged dry spells
in localized areas that negatively impacted crop development.
Key informant information indicates improved access to fishing
kits this year compared to last year, as humanitarians had
relatively better access for delivery of these resources.
Though the availability of fish and wild foods have increased
seasonally, access to typical fishing areas remain restricted by
ongoing insecurity. Most households are engaged in fishing and
gathering of wild foods in areas near homesteads or areas of
displacement. Households displaced to islands are primarily
consuming fish and water lilies.

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

Source: FEWS NET

10

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook
Recent assessments indicate that livestock body conditions
are normal, though access to livestock products is below
normal due to large decreases in herd sizes. According to
the FSNMS, around 80-90 percent of surveyed households
reported “large declines” in their livestock herd sizes. In
Leer, Koch, and Mayendit, surveyed households reported
owning an average of five cattle, and in Panyijiar
households reported owning two cattle. This is compared
to pre-crisis herd sizes of 10 to 15 cattle, suggesting a 5085 percent decline in cattle ownership. A FEWS NET
analysis of high-resolution satellite imagery over Guit,
Koch, Mayendit, Leer, and Panyijiar corroborates the
survey data, suggesting an 85 percent reduction in the
number of cattle in these counties between 2015 and
2017. In addition to lower than normal amounts of milk,
households are unlikely to earn income from the sale of
livestock as there is little demand for livestock purchases.

October 2017 to May 2018
Figure 11. Beneficiaries receiving emergency humanitarian
assistance compared to estimated need
350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
0
Sep-16 Oct-16 Nov-16 Dec-16 Jan-17 Feb-17 Mar-17 Apr-17 May-17 Jun-17 Jul-17 Aug-17 Sep-17
Panyijiar

Leer

Koch

Mayendit

Estimated need

Source: WFP/IPC TWG

Markets in Leer, Mayendit, and Koch towns have not
recovered following massive destruction and looting in Figure 12. Food security outcomes at the peak of the lean
mid-December 2013, and they remain non-functional. The season, August 2017, according to FSNMS round 20
Food Consumption
Household Hunger
nearest functioning market is at Bentiu PoC in Rubkona,
Score
Scale
though supplies are lower than pre-crisis levels and prices
are well above average. In September, the retail price of a
60.6% moderate;
20.8% borderline;
kilogram of sorghum in Bentiu was 108 SSP. However, a
19.0% severe
Leer
64.9% poor
significant proportion of the population in these counties
(2.2% HHS = 6)
of concern lack physical access to this market. In Koch, an
30.2% borderline;
87.5% moderate;
assessment conducted by REACH between May and July,
Koch
43.8% poor
1.0% severe
using Area of Knowledge methodology (AoK), estimated
25.4% borderline;
71.8% moderate;
that over half of settlements lack physical access to
Panyijiar
69.0% poor
25.4% severe;
markets. In Mayendit, a few operating small-scale markets
Source: FSNMS
have sugar, cooking oil, and salt supplied from Rumbek
North, but lack staple cereals. In Leer, only small-scale
markets exist in Adok town and on some islands including Torchriak and Mar. In all markets where staple foods are available,
prices are very high due to the high costs of canoe transportation. It is expected prices are above those observed in Bentiu.
Humanitarian assistance remains a key source of food in these counties. Between July and September, the number of
beneficiaries reached with emergency humanitarian assistance was, on average, 25 percent of the estimated need in Leer,
Koch, and Mayendit, and 50 percent of the estimated need in Panyijiar. This is broadly corroborated by FSNMS data, through
which 40-70 percent of surveyed households in these counties reported receiving assistance in the form of a general food
distribution between May and July. According to WFP, a full ration is provided, but excludes salt, and the inclusion of oil is
inconsistent given pipeline constraints. Although assistance is not fully meeting the estimated need, it is expected food
security outcomes have improved relative to late 2016, when little to no assistance was being delivered (Figure 11).
According to SMART surveys conducted between August and September, levels of acute malnutrition are ‘Serious’ (GAM
(WHZ) = 10-14.9%) in these counties. This is a slight improvement from past surveys in the area, attributed to increased
assistance and greater nutrition services relative to 2014-2016. In Panyijiar, a SMART survey by IMC in September reported a
GAM (WHZ) prevalence of 13.2 percent (10.1-17.2), and in Koch nutrition results from the FSNMS reported a GAM (WHZ)
prevalence of 14.6 percent (8.6-23.8). These results are indicative of Crisis (IPC Phase 3). Recent nutrition results are not
available for Leer or Mayendit. In Panyijiar, the only county for which mortality data is available, the above mentioned SMART
survey reported a non-trauma CDR of 1.13/10,000/day (0.95-2.21), indicative of Emergency (IPC Phase 4).
Even in the presence of large-scale humanitarian assistance, FSNMS data suggests that food consumption gaps persisted
during the lean season (Figure 12). In Leer, 64.9 percent of households reported a poor FCS and 19.1 percent reported a
severe HHS. In Panyijiar 69.0 percent reported a poor FCS and 25.4 percent reported a severe HHS. In Koch counties, 43.8
percent reported a poor FCS and 1.0 percent reported a severe HHS. The FCS in all these counties is indicative of Emergency

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

11

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook

October 2017 to May 2018

(IPC Phase 4). The HHS is indicative of Crisis (IPC Phase 3) in Leer and Koch, but points to Emergency (IPC Phase 4) in Panyijiar.
Insufficient data was collected in Mayendit, but it is expected food security outcomes are similar to Leer.
Food security has not improved significantly in October in central and southern Unity as conflict continues to disrupt normal
livelihood activities. Crisis (IPC Phase 3) outcomes are likely in Koch where relatively better security is allowing households to
move to wider areas to gather wild foods, fish, and occasionally access markets. Crisis (IPC Phase 3!) is likely in Panyijiar where
relative stability has allowed consistent delivery of large-scale assistance. In Leer and Mayendit, insecurity limits household
movement in search of alternative food assistance to a greater extent and assistance deliveries have occasionally been
disrupted, meaning some households in need are likely not being reached. Emergency (IPC Phase 4) persist in these counties.
In Leer, available evidence from the recent FSNMS data conducted during the lean season July/August suggests some
households were in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) at the peak of the lean season, and given the likelihood that not all households
have access to a harvest, it is expected that some households could still be in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5).

Assumptions
In addition to the national-level assumptions above, projected food security outcomes for the counties of concern in Unity
State are based on the following assumptions:


Though key informant information indicate that access to fishing kits is relatively better this year compared to last year,
access to fish is still expected to be lower than normal throughout the scenario period as fishing activities will be limited
to nearby waters.



Market and trade route functioning is expected to continue at very low levels given insecurity. The recovery of key
markets in main towns of Leer, Koch, and Mayendit is unlikely. However, trade flows to Adok port of Leer from Juba are
expected to continue. Some goods will be available on this market and other small markets in counties of concern. Where
staple foods are available, prices are expected to remain extremely high.



Income from agricultural labor will be significantly below average throughout the outlook period as most households who
cultivated lack resources to hire labor. This is based on key informant information and recent FSNMS data which reported
less than 2 percent of households in counties of concern are earning income from agricultural labor.



Production levels are expected to be lowest in Mayendit and Leer, based on FSNMS data that reports households are
harvesting under a month’s worth of cereal.



Access to milk will seasonally increase through November, though milk availability is still likely to remain well below
average due to reduction in livestock owned. Milk access is expected to be lowest in Mayendit and Leer, where FSNMS
data reports only 5 percent of households have access to milking livestock. Few households will sell livestock during the
outlook period due to lack of access to markets, low demand for livestock, and little to no cash in circulation.



Wild foods, including water lilies and other leafy vegetables are expected to be remain seasonally available through
November. Wild foods such as Lalob (Balanites spp) and nabag (Ziziphus ssp) will become available through April.
Households will have normal access to these wild foods near homesteads, but many will face constraints to move to
wider areas in search of additional wild foods.



Between October and December, WFP plans to reach an estimated 353,000 beneficiaries per month: 52,000 beneficiaries
a month in Koch, 100,000 beneficiaries a month in Leer, 68,000 beneficiaries a month in Mayendit, and 133,000
beneficiaries a month in Panyijiar. In each county, this is between 60 and 100 percent of the estimated need. Given
insecurity in Koch, Mayendit, and Leer that has at times led to the evacuation of aid workers and disrupted the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, assistance deliveries are not guaranteed. In Panyijiar, though, relative security has allowed for
regular assistance delivery in the past, and it is assumed this will most likely continue through December.

Most Likely Food Security Outcomes
Food security is expected to improve somewhat through January as most households will have access to some harvest and the
availability of fish and wild foods will seasonally increase. Crisis (IPC Phase 3) will persist in Koch, where household movement
is somewhat less restricted and production levels are expected to be slightly higher. In Leer and Mayendit, where harvests will
last households under a month and few households have access to milking livestock, Emergency (IPC Phase 4) will persist.
Although humanitarian assistance will likely reach at least some beneficiaries in these three counties through December,

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

12

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook
assistance deliveries cannot be guaranteed given ongoing
insecurity. In Panyijiar, food security outcomes were extreme
during the lean season, but food security will improve somewhat
with the ongoing harvest and food assistance is expected to
continue, and Crisis (IPC Phase 3!) outcomes are likely. Food
security is expected to deteriorate between February and May in
all counties of concern as the availability of milk, wild foods, and
fish seasonally decline, and households deplete harvests.
Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes are expected in all counties of
concern during this time. In Leer, where conflict is most likely to
restrict household movement in search of alternative foods,
some households are likely to be in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5).
Although Leer is of greatest concern, in a worst-case scenario of
extended absence of humanitarian assistance, Famine (IPC Phase
5) is likely in all counties of concern in Unity State.

October 2017 to May 2018
Figure 13. Area of concern reference map, Ayod,
Nyirol, Fangak, Canal, Duk, and Uror of Jonglei State

Jonglei: Ayod, Nyirol, Fangak, Canal, Duk and Uror
Counties
Current Situation
Security has been relatively stable since August 2016 in Duk,
Fangak and Canal, but remains volatile in Ayod, Nyirol and Uror
where armed clashes between Government forces and armed
opposition between February and May 2017 displaced many from
their places of origin. As of August 2017, there are 237,850
internally displaced persons in these counties of concern. Of
greatest concern are Gorwai, Pagil, Nyanpol, Karmun, and
Normanyang of Ayod and Pading, Nyambor and parts of Pultruk
of Nyirol, where insecurity is limiting regular humanitarian access.
Green harvest consumption has been minimal and short-lived
across counties of concern due to significantly reduced area
planted. This has been due to a combination of factors including
insecurity, shortage of seed and tools, and erratic rainfall. Though
most households reported planting, harvests are estimated to be
below levels harvested last year and the five-year average, due to
crop losses from flooding and household displacement away from
fields.

Source: FEWS NET

Figure 14. Food security outcomes at the peak of the
lean season, August 2017, according to FSNMS round 20
Food Consumption
Score

Household
Hunger Scale

Ayod

20.7% borderline;
69.5% poor

31.0% moderate;
62.6% severe
(2.8% HHS = 6)

Nyirol

18.5% borderline;
43.1% poor

73.8% moderate;
21.5% severe
(10.8% HHS = 6)

76.1% moderate;
6.5% borderline;
Markets in Ayod, Canal, Uror, Nyirol, Fangak, and Walgak of
18.5% severe
Pigi/Canal
84.8% poor
Akobo are operating at lower levels than normal due to both
(8.7% HHS = 6)
seasonally deteriorated road access and ongoing insecurity that is
40.4% borderline;
60.6% moderate;
limiting households’ and traders’ access to markets. Households
Duk
28.7%
poor
29.8% severe
in Ayod, Nyirol, and Uror have limited physical access to markets,
75.1%
moderate;
a change since April 2017 when large-scale conflict in Uror spread
30.2% borderline;
24.1%
severe
Uror
to Nyirol and parts of Ayod, destroying markets in the areas. In
45.2% poor
(1.9% HHS = 6)
Fangak and Canal, where some households have physical access
to markets, households are purchasing foods less frequently due
36.8% borderline;
64.2% moderate;
Fangak
to high food prices and lack of income. Staple food supplies from
60.0% poor
31.6% severe
Bor South and Aboko to these counties of concern are being
Source: FSNMS
transported by a limited number of traders and the price of goods
are extremely high on destination markets due to the risk premium. Prices are likely higher than those recorded in Bor South
(162 SSP/kg) and Akobo (115 SSP/kg). Conversely, market functionality has slightly recovered in Duk County since disruption in
August 2016 given relative stability and its proximity to source markets such as Bor South and Twic East.

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

13

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook

October 2017 to May 2018

Livestock conditions are generally good due to improved availability of water and pasture and ongoing vaccination and
treatment programs conducted by agencies in targeted locations. Access to milk has increased seasonally in all areas of
concern but remains below normal due to large decrease in livestock ownership. According to FSNMS data, households in
Canal, Ayod, and Duk reported owning 3-6 cattle, and in Fangak, Uror, and Nyirol, households reported owning 7-10 cattle.
This is compared to typical levels of 10-15 cattle for these counties.
Given significant restrictions on access to fishing grounds in Ayod, Nyirol, and Uror, fishing activities are currently taking places
only in bodies of water near homesteads, where fewer fish are available. Consumption of fish is below normal in these areas
as a result. Households in all counties of concern are gathering wild foods currently, though, as with fishing, access to areas
away from homesteads is limited in Ayod, Nyirol and Uror.
The delivery of humanitarian assistance has been relatively consistent in Duk and Fangak, and large-scale assistance is being
distributed to Duk. Large-scale humanitarian assistance has been delivered in Ayod in recent months as well, and some
households not near distribution sites are likely moving in search of assistance. However, some areas likely still lack access.
The SMART survey conducted by RMF in September indicated that assistance has not been delivered to Pagil since December
2016. Access to Gorwai of Ayod has also been inconsistent. The delivery of assistance has also been inconsistent in Nyirol,
Uror, and Canal due to the ongoing insecurity.
FSNMS data from the lean season reported a severe HHS in all counties of concern (Figure 14). In Pigi/Canal, Ayod, and Nyirol,
3-10 percent households reported a HHS of 6, indicative of extreme food consumption gaps. There is less confidence in the
likelihood of households in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) in Pigi/Canal given relative ability to move in search of food sources in
this county, it is expected that some households were in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) in Ayod and Nyirol at the peak of the lean
season. It is expected the outcomes observed during the lean season have persisted into October, as harvest are well below
average, most households lack access to income to purchase food on the market, and humanitarian assistance is unable to
reach some households. Emergency (IPC Phase 4) persists in all counties and some households are likely in Catastrophe (IPC
Phase 5) in Ayod and Nyirol. In Duk, though, Crisis (IPC Phase 3!) outcomes are likely currently given slight improvements
during the harvest, improved access to markets, and the continuation of large-scale assistance.

Assumptions
In addition to the national-level assumptions above, projected food security outcomes for the counties of concern in Jonglei
are based on the following assumptions:


Conflict between Government forces and armed opposition forces is likely to continue in Ayod, Nyirol, and Uror. This will
disrupt livelihood activities, drive further displacement to highland settlements and to neighboring Ethiopia, and limit
trade flows to counties of concern.



Based on FEWS NET price projections for Bor South, the price of a kilogram of sorghum is expected to range between 130
and 133 SSP from October to January. Based on this, it expected that the prices of staple foods in counties of concern,
which are destination markets, will remain extremely high throughout the projection period.



In Duk, Fangak, and Canal, market supplies are expected to be below average. In Ayod, Nyirol, and Uror, market supplies
are expected to be significantly below average.



Greater flooding than usual is expected along the Nile basin areas of Ayod, Duk, Fangak, and Canal through November
due to heavy rainfall. This is expected to increase fish availability, but is also likely to displace some households, destroy
homes, make some trade routes impassible, and destroy some vegetable crops.



Due to above-average rainfall from June to September, pasture and water resources will be above average. This will allow
livestock to stay near homesteads through December, prolonging access to livestock products.



WFP plans to distribute emergency food assistance amounting to 3,059 MT in all areas of concern targeting population of
530,510 monthly from October to December, roughly 70 percent of the need of these counties. Given insecurity in Nyirol,
Uror, and Ayod that has at times disrupted assistance deliveries, the delivery of assistance is not guaranteed to these
counties. In Duk, Pigi/Canal, and Fangak, though, relative security has allowed for regular assistance delivery in the past,
and it is assumed this will most likely continue through December.

Most Likely Food Security Outcomes

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

14

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook

October 2017 to May 2018

Food insecurity is expected to persist in all counties of concern between October and January due to little or no harvest,
limited physical access to markets, and insecurity that is limiting the ability of many households to move in search of typical
food sources such as fish and wild foods. Access to milk during this time will be seasonally higher, but will remain below
normal levels due to large decrease in livestock ownership in the areas of concern, limiting household consumption compared
to normal. Emergency (IPC Phase 4) is expected in all counties of concern with exception of Duk where Crisis (IPC Phase 3!)
will persist given planned large-scale assistance and the likelihood of consistent delivery.
Food security will deteriorate between February and May and more households will be in Emergency (IPC Phase 4).
Households will have depleted their food stocks atypically early in January and while they will have some access to fish, game
meat, milk, and wild foods, the availability of these food sources will seasonally decline. Emergency (IPC Phase 4) will persist.
Of greatest concern will be Ayod and Nyirol. Given how extreme outcomes were during the 2017 lean season, and based on
the assumption of irregular assistance deliveries, some households are expected to be in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) during this
time. As discussed above, in a worst-case scenario, characterized by the extended absence of humanitarian assistance, Famine
(IPC Phase 5) is likely in these counties.

EVENTS THAT MIGHT CHANGE THE OUTLOOK
Table 1. Possible events over the next eight months that could change the most-likely scenario.
Area

Event

Impact on food security outcomes

National

Implementation of Peace
Agreement

Efforts to implement the Peace Agreement that lead to a permanent
ceasefire would improve the security and allow households to slowly
regain their livelihoods and return to their places of origin. Trade
flows and humanitarian assistance could better reach households in
need, and households would be able to move in search of food and
pursue income-earning opportunities. Food insecurity would be less
severe throughout the outlook period and the risk of Famine (IPC
Phase 5) would greatly decline.

National

Absence of humanitarian
assistance

In a scenario of a complete absence of humanitarian assistance,
Famine (IPC Phase 5) is likely. Many households would be unable to
meet their basic food needs through own production or market
purchases, as many have depleted livelihood assets over the past four
years, and would likely face conflict-related restrictions to movement
in search of alternative foods.

ABOUT SCENARIO DEVELOPMENT
To project food security outcomes, FEWS NET develops a set of assumptions about likely events, their effects, and the probable
responses of various actors. FEWS NET analyzes these assumptions in the context of current conditions and local livelihoods to arrive at
a most likely scenario for the coming eight months. Learn more here.

Famine Early Warning Systems Network

15

