SYNTHESIS REPORT

Extreme weather and resilience
of the global food system

Contents

This report originates from a Taskforce of academics, industry and policy
experts to examine the resilience of the global food system to extreme
weather events. The Taskforce was brought together by the UK’s Global Food
Security programme and was jointly commissioned by the UK Foreign and
Commonwealth Office and UK Government Science and Innovation Network.
This Synthesis report on Extreme weather and resilience of the global food
system, sits in the context of three detailed sub reports on Climate and global
production shocks, Review of the responses to food production shocks and
Country level impacts of Global Production Shocks. There is also an overall
Extreme weather and resilience of the global food system summary report.
The contents of these reports are based upon workshop discussions held at
Willis Tower, Chicago in October 2014 and the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office, London in February 2015 (see Appendix for a full list).
This report should be cited as:
Extreme weather and resilience of the global food system (2015). Final Project
Report from the UK-US Taskforce on Extreme Weather and Global Food System
Resilience, The Global Food Security programme, UK.
Authors
The following are the lead authors for this report, in alphabetical order
(*=coordinating lead authors):
Rob Bailey*(Chatham House, UK)
Tim G. Benton* (UK Global Food Security Programme & University of Leeds, UK)
Andy Challinor (University of Leeds, UK)
Joshua Elliott* (Computation Institute at the University of Chicago, USA)

Foreword

1

Executive summary

2

1. Food demand and supply and the impact of
weather in a changing world

3

2. The US-UK Taskforce on extreme weather
& global food system resilience

4

3. Weather and shocks to the global food system

5

4. Policy and market responses to
weather-influenced production shocks

7

5. How would a plausible worst case scenario impact
on societies, economies and the environment?
10
6. Key recommendations for increasing resilience to 		
production shocks at global and local levels
11
Visual summary of scenarios

12

Appendix

14

References

16

David Gustafson*(ILSI Research Foundation, Washington, USA)
Bradley Hiller (Global Sustainability Institute, Anglia Ruskin University, UK)
Aled Jones* (Global Sustainability Institute, Anglia Ruskin University, UK)
Molly Jahn (University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA)
Chris Kent (Met Office, UK)
Kirsty Lewis* (Met Office, UK)
Theresa Meacham (UK Global Food Security Programme)
Mike Rivington (The James Hutton Institute, Aberdeen, Scotland, UK)
David Robson (Scottish Government, UK)
Richard Tiffin*(Centre for Food Security, University of Reading, UK)
Donald J. Wuebbles (Department of Atmospheric Sciences, University of Illinois,
USA)
Plus contributors to report and attendees at workshops in Chicago and London

Electronic versions of the report series may be found at the addresses below:
Extreme weather and resilience of the global food system summary report
www.foodsecurity.ac.uk/assets/pdfs/extreme-weather-resilience-of-global-food-system.pdf
Climate and Global Crop Production Shocks
www.foodsecurity.ac.uk/assets/pdfs/climate-and-global-crop-production-shocks.pdf
Review of the responses to food production shocks
www.foodsecurity.ac.uk/assets/pdfs/review-of-responses-to-food-production-shocks.pdf
Country level impacts of Global Production Shocks
www.foodsecurity.ac.uk/assets/pdfs/country-impacts-of-global-grain-production-shocks.pdf
Front cover: simazoran/istockphoto.com

Foreword
This report makes a vital contribution to the study of the
risks facing the international food system and helpfully
identifies areas where more work is needed.
We know that the climate is changing and weather
records are being broken all the time. Some of these
weather records make a big impact on people – their
ability to make a living and feed their families and in
some cases their vulnerability to extreme events.
Looking ahead, we can see that the world is changing,
but we are not yet in a position to understand in detail
what the weather will look like, and what the events will
be that impact upon people’s lives the most.

Sir David King
UK Foreign Secretary’s Special Representative for
Climate Change and former UK Government Chief
Scientist

The food system we increasingly rely on is a global
enterprise. Up to now it’s been pretty robust and
extreme weather has had limited impact on a global
scale. But if the risks of an event are growing, and
it could be unprecedented in scale and extent, how
well prepared are we? Especially in the context of an
international food system that over time has become
increasingly efficient and therefore less resilient, the risks
are serious and should be a cause for concern.
Given the potentially huge impacts such an event
could have in our increasingly interconnected world, we
should be looking carefully at even very low probability
situations and the likelihood of the scenarios suggested
in this report are far too significant to ignore.
This report examines some of the things we know
and identifies areas where we need to know more. It
imagines a plausible worst case scenario for the near
future, and uses this to look at responses and impacts.
It is useful in making us think about ensuring that when
such events happen we take timely steps that make the
situation better and not worse as well as what we can do
now to prepare.

|

1

Executive summary
A Taskforce of academics, industry and policy experts was
commissioned to examine the resilience of the global food system
to extreme weather. This summary is built on three detailed reports:
Climate and global production shocks (Annex A), Review of the
responses to production shocks (Annex B) and the Country-level
impacts of global grain production shocks (Annex C).
We present evidence that the global food system is vulnerable to
production shocks caused by extreme weather, and that this risk
is growing. Although much more work needs to be done to reduce
uncertainty, preliminary analysis of limited existing data suggests
that the risk of a 1-in-100 year production shock is likely to increase
to 1-in-30 or more by 2040. Additionally, recent studies suggest that
our reliance on increasing volumes of global trade, whilst having
many benefits, also creates structural vulnerability via a liability to
amplify production shocks in some circumstances. Action is therefore
needed to improve the resilience of the global food system to
weather-related shocks, to mitigate their impact on people. A visual
of the scenarios in the report can be found on pages 12-13. Key
recommendations include:

Understand the risks better
More research is needed to understand and quantify the risks set
out in this report. Our assessment is that they are non-trivial and
increasing, but our knowledge of how extreme weather may be
connected across the world, and hence the precise probability
of multiple bread basket failures, is limited by available model
simulations. Modelling limitations also constrain our ability to
understand how production shocks translate into short run price
impacts.

Explore opportunities for coordinated risk management
As knowledge emerges regarding plausible worst case scenarios,
it will be possible for governments, international institutions and
businesses to develop contingency plans and establish early warning
systems with agreed response protocols. Other opportunities include
coordinated management of emergency and/or strategic reserves.

2

|

Improve the functioning of international markets
History demonstrates that the actions of market participants in
response to production losses, or the behaviours of other actors,
are a crucial determinant of price impacts. Other problems that
can exacerbate price spikes include low levels of stocks relative to
consumption, poor transparency of market information and physical
limitations on trade such as infrastructural constraints.

Bolster national resilience to market shocks
Governments should also consider policies to bolster national
resilience to international market shocks. This is a particularly
important policy agenda for import dependent developing countries
with high numbers of poor food consumers, and/or high risk of
political instability. The precise mix of appropriate policy measures
will vary according to national context.

Adapt agriculture for a changing climate
Agriculture faces a triple challenge. Productivity must be increased by
reversing declines in yield growth and closing the gap between actual
and attainable yields in the developing world, whilst also reducing its
environmental impact (eg 50:1 degradation, depletion of freshwater
supplies, increasing greenhouse gas emissions or eutrophication).
However, given the increasing risk of extreme weather, this
cannot come at the expense of production resilience. Increases
in productivity, sustainability and resilience to climate change are
required. This will require significant investment from the public and
private sectors, as well as new cross-sector collaborations.

1. Food demand and supply and the impact of weather in a
changing world
By 2050, the FAO estimates that demand for food will increase
over 60% above the current situation. Demand growth is driven
by population and demographic change, and increasing global
wealth. This, in turn, leads to greater per capita food demand,
often associated with demand for more livestock produce. In
2007/8, a small weather-related production shock, coupled with
historically low stock-to-use levels, led to rapid food price inflation,
as measured by the FAO Food Price Index and associated with the
main internationally traded grains1. This increase was compounded
by some countries imposing barriers to local export, to ensure their
own food security, leading to an FAO price spike of over 100%. A
similar price spike occurred in 2010/11, partly influenced by weather
in Eastern Europe and Russia2.

There is now very extensive and convincing evidence that the
climate4 is changing5. Climate change can lead to a change in the
mean (average) of a climatic variable, like temperature or rainfall,
and/or its variability6. Changes in variability are just as important
as changes in the average. To caricature this, climate change may
result, on average, in an area getting wetter; however, if the variance
is also increasing, it is possible for both floods and droughts to
become more common. As extreme weather is often associated
with the highest impacts on human systems, understanding exactly
how the shape of the distribution of weather will change relative
to the mean is important7. Whilst there is currently incomplete
understanding of how extremes will change (see discussion in Annex
A), there is nonetheless good evidence that extreme weather events,
from intense storms to droughts and heatwaves, are increasing in
frequency and severity at a considerable rate8.
Most agriculture is climate dependent. Weather’s variability
determines the relative productivity of the seasons9, and thus
underpins variation in global food markets and determines the
spatial distribution of agriculture. If production variability is also
being driven by increasing variability of the weather across years, it
implies there will be increased within-season price instability coupled
with longer term challenges to the structure of the food system. The
impact of changing patterns of extreme weather on global food

istockphoto.com

These spikes created a number of significant impacts around the
world. In rich countries, where food is freely available, food price
inflation was significant and the poorest suffered, resulting in
people trading down on food quality or quantity, and in the process
spending significantly more. In poorer countries, especially those
with fragile governance, rapid food price inflation undermined
civil order, and, in part was a spark for the Arab Spring and the
consequences that have followed3. In 2012, the worst drought to
hit the American Midwest for half a century triggered comparable
spikes in international maize and soybean prices. This sequence of
price spikes, and their consequences, re-alerted the world to the need
to focus on global food availability and the volatility in its supply. Sir
John Beddington’s powerful analogy of “the perfect storm” - of rising
demand for food, water and energy whilst climate change creates
increasing constraints - became a call to action on how to manage
demand growth in a world under pressure.
system resilience therefore requires more investigation.
It is easier to make inferences from climate models and historical
data about the average climate than it is about the extremes of
the distribution, because by their very nature these events are
rare, so sample sizes are small. Inferences about extremes are
therefore much more uncertain. So, whilst climate models give us
a good understanding of how climate may change in future, our
understanding of the way extreme events may change is much less
certain. For example, the authors of a recent paper10 comparing
data to model predictions of extreme rainfall, concluded: “Our
results also show that the global climate models we used may have
underestimated the observed trend, which implies that extreme
precipitation events may strengthen more quickly in the future
than projected and that they may have more severe impacts
than estimated.” In addition, for some climate phenomena (such
as the way that large scale circulation patterns like the southern
oscillation may change), inter-model comparison shows considerable
variability11. Given that “it is difficult to rank models for their accuracy,
...any model integration can be considered equally valid, and those
that indicate [worse] conditions imply a future potential risk”12. In
other words the rarest conditions are the most uncertain and difficult
to study, but because they are also typically the most impactful, their
study is most important.

|

3

2. The US-UK Taskforce on extreme weather & global food
system resilience
In 2012, Sir John Beddington, then UK Government Chief Scientific
Advisor, commissioned a report on food system resilience from the
UK’s Food Research Partnership. That report13 concluded:
The complexity of interactions between the global food
supply chain and global weather means that the impacts
of a particular weather event will vary with the location,
timing and the overall context. The evidence is not available
properly to describe with any certainty how variable weather
will impact on food production systems and worldwide trade,
but our contention is that we need greater investigation
of what they could be, with perhaps greater consideration
being given to reasonable “worst case scenarios”. …
The weather in 2012 (drought to floods in the UK,
drought, heatwave, floods across the rest of the Northern
Hemisphere) cautions us to consider fully that weather may
simultaneously impact in different places separated widely
in space, and that therefore there is potential for widespread
impacts on food supply. Given that the frequency of weather
extremes is increasing, the potential for large impacts, and
unprecedented ones, is growing.

In 2014, the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the UK
Government Science and Innovation Network (supported also
by the Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs)
jointly commissioned the UK’s Global Food Security programme to
bring together a cross-disciplinary UK-US taskforce of experts (see
Appendix A) to examine the risks of extreme weather’s impact on
the food system, the responses the market and policy actors may
make to any shortfall in production, and the impacts this may lead
to (Figure 1). Given better understanding of climatic risks, likely
responses and impacts, a further aim was to highlight positive actions
to reduce impacts on people and markets. The Taskforce’s work also
highlights gaps in our understanding and where further research is
needed.
This report summarises the outputs from the Taskforce into three
areas: (i) how the changing weather may create shocks to the global
food system (Section 3, Annex A), and, from this the development
of a “plausible” worst case scenario for a shock; (ii) plausible market
and policy responses to the worst case scenario (Section 4, Annex B);
and (iii) how the combination of scenario and responses may impact
upon different societies, economies and the environment (Section 5,
Annex C).

eg	  ECONOMIC	  -­‐	  POLITICAL	  -­‐	  SOCIAL	  –	  TECHNOLOGICAL	  

Weather	  
Events	  

Food	  
Produc2on	  
SHOCK

eg	  INFRASTRUCTURE	  –	  ENVIRONMENT	  

RESPONSE	  
to	  shocks	  

Prices…	  
Imports…	  
Exports…	  

IMPACTS	  

eg	  STATE	  -­‐	  CORPORATE	  –	  MARKET	  

SYSTEMIC	  
AMPLIFYING	  AND	  MITIGATING	  FACTORS	  

Figure 1: The conceptual framework for devising and assessing different scenarios of disruption to the food supply chain. Analysis was fixed around the two
quantitative reference points of a shock to production (in terms of total loss), and the effects on food prices, imports and exports. The disruption pathways
described how (a) climatological conditions that could create the shocks (e.g. droughts, storms) and their likelihood, (b) the most plausible and likely policy and
market responses to the shock, and (c) the pathways that will result in the global food security impacts.

4

|

3. Weather and shocks to the global food system
Food production of the globally most important commodity crops
(maize, soybean, wheat and rice) comes from a small number of
major producing countries. The exposure of a large proportion of
global production of the major crops is therefore concentrated in
particular parts of the globe (Figure 2), and so extreme weather
events in these regions have the largest impact on global food
production. Simultaneous extreme weather events in two or more
of these regions – creating a multiple bread basket failure – would
represent a serious production shock, however understanding the
covariance of extreme weather events in different production regions
is currently under-researched. There is an urgent need to understand
the driving dynamics of meteorological teleconnections, such as
the El Niño – which may be becoming more extreme - in order to
quantify the likelihoods of coincident production shocks in major
food-producing regions.
By examining production shocks in the recent past, we show that
weather events, particularly drought, are a major driver of these
shocks. Using the example of these past events we generated a
set of scenarios, in the present or near-future, of weather-driven
production shocks for each of the four crops (Annex A). These we
combined to create a plausible worst case scenario (Box 1).

Figure 2. Proportion of the total calories coming from the main four
commodity crops per country. Within each country, agricultural production is
also typically concentrated (see fig S7a in Foley 2011 for a spatially resolved
map). For example, the bulk of calories produced in the US come from soy
and maize in the Midwest, in Brazil agricultural production, mainly soy, is
concentrated inland from the SE coast; rice predominantly comes from
the Indo-Gangetic plain, SE China and SE Asia) and wheat production is
concentrated in NW Europe and around the Black Sea.

Box 1: Plausible scenario for extreme weather’s impacts on crop production
Analysis of the historical records indicated that in 1988/89 there was a significant drought-related impact on the yields of maize and
soybean, and in 2002/3 drought impacted on wheat in Europe, Russia, India and China and rice in India. The global production loss
estimated from the historical and simulated anomalies using the Global Gridded Crop Model Intercomparison (GGCMI) data for the four
crops in 1988/9 and 2002/3 are given in Table 1. Our plausible worst case scenario is that the two patterns of weather - that resulted in
maize and soy, and wheat and rice being significantly affected - occur simultaneously. Without further work we cannot quantify the risk of
this scenario, but we consider that a significant impact on all four crops of these magnitudes is plausible.
Table 1. Impacts of weather on production of 4 main crops in 1988/9 and 2002/3 (from Annex A)

CROP

CASE STUDY YEAR

% GLOBAL
PRODUCTION
DECREASE

ABSOLUTE
PRODUCTION LOSS
(MILLION TONNES)

MODELLED YIELD LOSS
FROM GGCMI (%)

MAIZE

1988

12%

55.9

13.5-16.4

SOYBEAN

1988/89

8.5%

8.9

6.0-6.3

WHEAT

2003

6%

36.6

6.4-9.5

RICE

2002/03

4%

21.7

1.9-3.5

3.1 Changing profiles of risks over time: a first analysis
Through the use of climate models coupled to crop models, we can
explore the changing risk of major shocks to the food system. To
gauge whether we should be concerned about changing risks, we
undertook an initial exploration of existing model outputs using
the AgMIP/ISI-MIP model ensemble16. In terms of global calorieweighted yields of maize, soy, wheat and rice produced, the ensemble
produces a distribution of yields in response to modelled weather
(shown in Fig 3 as histograms for “historical” and “near-term” future,
and as box plots for 4 time periods). Comparing the histograms, there
are changes in the shape of the distribution in future relative to the
last decades: they “flatten out”. This change in shape represents a
significant increase in variance between the modelled historical and
the near term future (For Fig 3’s top histograms, the near-term future

variance increases 43% relative to the historical, Fisher Variance
Ratio Test, P<0.0001), and this increasing variability continues to
increase throughout the century (Fig 3, top right hand panel).
This ensemble analysis suggests that what we would call an extreme
food production shock in the late 20th century will become more
common in the future (Fig 3). These data indicate that a 1-in-200
year event for the climate in the late 20th century equates to a loss of
approximately 8.5% (Fig 3 top), and over the next decades (20112040), a 1-in-200 year event is about 15% larger in magnitude and
equivalent to the loss of 9.8% of calorie production. Furthermore,
according to the ensemble, an event that we would have called 1-in100 years over the period 1951-2010 may become as frequent as a
1-in-30 year event before the middle of the century.

|

5

Figure 3: Model-based distributions of global calorie-weighted yield of maize, soy, wheat, and rice for the historical (1951-2010) and near-future (2011-2040)
period with (top row) and without (bottom row) the effects of fertilization from increasing atmospheric CO2 included. The estimated magnitude of a 1-in200 year event in each period is indicated by arrows on the histograms. The box plots summarise the distributions and show the likely increasing variability
continuing throughout the century.

The analysis shown in the top row of Fig 3, assumes full effectiveness
of CO2 fertilization. Recently questions have been raised about the
magnitude of this beneficial effect17,18. If we assume instead that
there is no CO2 fertilization at this large scale, we find similar but even
more severe effects in later decades (Fig 3 bottom): a 1-in-200 year
event in the near-term future is ~25% greater magnitude and the
extreme left tail indicates the potential for historically unprecedented
events. Without CO2 effects, a historically 1-in-100 year event is
estimated to occur more than once every 10 years by the second half
of the 21st century.
We must emphasise these results are a preliminary analysis and
limited by the availability of high-resolution global climate model
runs. Significant work is needed to reduce the uncertainty and better
understand the way extreme weather may change. Nonetheless, the
indications are clear that the global food system is facing increasing
risks due to more frequent extreme weather.

6

|

4. Policy and market responses to weather-influenced
production shocks
Global food trade has increased in recent years, bringing well
understood benefits. Trade allows countries with limited productive
potential to meet domestic demand; it facilitates specialisation
and efficiency; and it generally increases resilience by smoothing
local disruptions. However, not all disruptions are equal. As Section
3 highlighted, the system is not robust to a shock in one or more
major production regions, pointing to inherent systemic risk in the
geographical concentration of global food production.
As noted by May (regarding financial and ecosystem networks,
but similarly applies to the global food network which shares some
network properties) there is a complex interplay between robustness
and vulnerability19. Greater interconnectedness reduces countries’
vulnerability to local production shocks, but may increase vulnerability
to shocks in distant breadbasket regions. It also means the food
system is more vulnerable to a sudden reversal in connectivity, for
example due to an outbreak of trade restrictions.
A recent study examining the evolution of trade networks over the
period 1992-2009 concluded:
…the global food system does exhibit characteristics consistent
with a fragile one that is vulnerable to self-propagating
disruptions. That is, in a setting where countries are increasingly
interconnected and more food is traded globally over the [last
two decades], a significant majority of countries are either
dependent on imports for their staple food supply or would look
to imports to meet any supply shortfalls20.
In essence, through deeper trade food importing countries have
reduced costs and vulnerability to localized production shocks, but at
the expense of increased exposure to systemic risks such as a shock
in a major production hub or a sudden deterioration in connectivity.
Recent price spikes illustrate clearly the systemic risks associated with
disruptions in major production regions and/or outbreaks of trade
restrictions. Other factors thought to have amplified these price spikes
include biofuel mandates, low ratios of stocks relative to demand and
depreciation of the US dollar21.
Historically, following past production shocks, individual grain prices
have more than doubled in a short space of time (Annex B). The food
system’s resilience to a weather-related shock can be defined by how
much food prices, access and availability are affected by it. Resilience
therefore depends on the magnitude of the physical shock and the
policy and market responses that may amplify or buffer its effects as
it propagates through the system.
In response to the last decade’s food price spikes, many governments
have developed strategic responses to better manage food
production. However, other key problems pertaining to demand and
trade responses remain unaddressed. If we are to avoid the worst
impacts of future production shocks, we need to develop greater
understanding of how responses may amplify, or mitigate, the price
impact of production shocks. These responses are determined by
the actions of agents mediated through markets. Governments
are significant players in this, both through their direct influence on
markets and their indirect influence on the other agents including

farmers, food manufacturers and retailers, consumers and relief
agencies.
To capture the potential market and government responses to food
production shocks in wheat, maize, soybean and rice, we conducted a
literature review, undertook a historical data analysis and completed
~50 interviews with experts from industry and policy around the
world (Annex B). Taking the plausible worst case production shocks
set out in Box 1 as a starting point, we developed a detailed scenario
of how weather and responses may interact on a global scale to
produce a significant market shock. Below we present this scenario for
2016 and 2026, assuming a plausible deterioration in food system
resilience in the latter case.
Economic modelling of the price impacts of these scenarios has not
been possible, and in any case, typical economic simulation models
are poorly suited to modelling short-run prices during periods where
markets are in disequilibrium and the magnitude of the shock is
significantly “out-of-sample”. Nevertheless, it is our judgement that
the combined production shock and responses outlined below in
the 2016 plausible worst case scenario could see the FAO food price
index reach record highs, surpassing 250 compared to around 170
at the time of writing, with a likely trebling in the price of individual
grains. By way of comparison, the index reached 226 in 2008
and 238 in 2011. All other things being equal, the 2026 scenario
would be expected to result in an even higher price spike. Economic
modelling of these scenarios would be one subject for subsequent
research.

4.1 Plausible scenarios22 for extreme weather and country
responses
4.1.1 A plausible worst case scenario for 2016
A disappointing Indian monsoon the previous year means 2016
opens with a poor outlook for wheat in India. But it is not until
early spring, when large areas of the Black Sea winter wheat crop
are killed by a temporary snow thaw and refreeze, that alarm
mounts. Russia and Ukraine both impose export bans in an effort to
conserve domestic supply23. International wheat prices climb rapidly,
precipitating a flurry of similar measures among Kazakhstan, India,
China and Pakistan; Argentina tightens existing export restrictions24.
Several countries including China, Saudi Arabia, Morocco and
Iran implement measures to reduce import prices, such as tariff
reductions or consumption subsidies25.
In early spring, the wheat harvest begins in India and the poor
outlook is confirmed. Expectations are similarly poor for the Chinese
wheat harvest, due to begin later in the season. In response both
governments increase export controls on rice in a bid to shore-up
domestic availability of cereals. Pakistan and Bangladesh follow
suit26. As mounting export controls constrain supply, the number of
importing countries slashing cereal tariffs or hiking consumption
subsidies continues to grow, driving up effective demand.
In late spring, drought sets in in North America and persists
throughout the summer. Soybean and maize forecasts drop steadily

|

7

over the period whilst prices, already dragged high by wheat, climb
rapidly. Argentina raises export taxes on both commodities; China
imposes an export tax on maize27. The situation is compounded by a
heatwave and drought that hits the European wheat crop, leading to
further rises across all cereals. The US indicates it will not waive the
ethanol mandate despite calls for it to do so, from other governments
and from interests in the livestock and food and beverage sectors28.
In early summer a second failure of the Indian monsoon is confirmed,
raising concerns about the rice harvest later in the year. Panic sets
in in the rice market, where Asian households, recalling the 2008
crisis, have been steadily hoarding. Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Egypt and
Nepal impose export restrictions29. Major importers such as Nigeria,
Malaysia and the Philippines place orders far in excess of normal
levels in a bid to calm domestic markets, bidding-up a tight market.
The commitment from governments in the Association of SE Asian
Nations (ASEAN) to coordinate trade responses buckles under
pressure and Vietnam, Cambodia and Indonesia impose export
bans30.
4.1.2 Plausible scenarios for 2026
Factors that may amplify the impact of production shocks in
2026
The consequences for global food security of any production shock
depends not only on the responses of key actors, but critically
also on the overall resilience of the food system and prevailing
macroeconomic conditions. It is far from difficult to develop a
plausible worst case scenario for 2026 in which system resilience
is lowered over the next decade and macroeconomic conditions

8

|

unfavourable, making the global food system considerably more
vulnerable to the same shocks.
The following factors would cumulatively reduce the resilience of the
global food system to supply shocks and increase the likelihood of a
price crisis.
•

Low stock-to-use ratios. Over the next decade, a number of
trends combine to drive down stock-to-use ratios to below crisis
thresholds31 by 2026. At the global level, sluggish yield growth
means production struggles to keep pace with demand, driven
by increasing consumption of animal products, increasing biofuel
use and population growth, generating sustained downward
pressure on stocks. Two disappointing global harvests in 2024
and 2025 see stock-to-use ratios fall below 20%.

•

Reduced self-sufficiency of China. China has maintained levels
of self-sufficiency in cereals in the range of 95-105% since the
mid-1990s, reducing its impacts on the international market.
However recent years have been characterised by modest but
persistent trade deficits, reflecting the growing challenge of
meeting increasing demand with a depleted resource base.
Over the coming decade, these deficits steadily increase. Soil
depletion, pollution and constraints on availability of water and
arable land cause production to fall further behind demand.
Farms become less competitive with imports due to a high
renminbi, aging rural workforce and increasing labour costs. In
an effort to contain domestic inflation the government allows
imports to rise, increasing demand on international markets.

•

•

•

•

Increasingly inelastic demand. By 2026, demand is more
inelastic, meaning that a greater price change is needed for
demand to adjust. Two factors contribute to this. First, higher
incomes in the developing world mean consumers are slower to
adjust consumption in response to price increases. Second, and
more importantly, further implementation of inflexible biofuel
mandates – primarily in developing countries – makes demand
more inelastic.
Recovery of oil prices. A sustained period of international oil
prices around $60 a barrel sees investments in production and
exploration cut back, leading to a subsequent supply crunch.
Prices climb steadily from 2020, and then rise rapidly in 2024
and 2025 due to instability in the Middle East. This feeds
through to food prices via a cost push effect, and increases
demand for biofuels.
Cumulative underinvestment in infrastructure in key
exporting regions. Three of the most important export
regions – Brazil, the USA, and the Black Sea region - face serious
infrastructural constraints that are already limiting their export
capacity at the margin, contributing to higher export prices and
slower supply responses. Underinvestment in all three regions
over the next decade sees the situation deteriorate.
Depreciation of US dollar. In 2025 and 2026, the US dollar
depreciates sharply, leading to an appreciation in the prices
of dollar-denominated commodities, including agricultural
commodities.

Box 2: Factors that may mitigate the impact of
production shocks in 2026
Rather than exacerbate a price spike, smart responses can also
mitigate one. In aggregate, the following actions could plausibly
limit price rises to within normal levels of annual variability:
• After an emergency meeting of the Rapid Response Forum
early in the year, member governments make a joint
commitment not to impose any export restrictions on their
agricultural sectors.
• ASEAN governments follow suit, with a similar
announcement on rice.
• Governments in major biofuel consuming countries reduce
biofuel mandates, increasing availability of grains and
oilseeds and dampening prices. This could be implemented
politically – for example an agreement brokered through the
Rapid Response Forum. Alternatively, a similar effect could
be achieved using call options that trigger when a certain
price threshold is breached, effectively transforming biofuel
mandates into virtual reserves32.
• Low-income consumers in poor or fragile countries are
protected from price rises through cash transfers and social
protection arrangements, quelling unrest and reducing the
incentives for governments to impose export controls.

Under this set of preconditions the production shocks considered
here would almost certainly result in a more dramatic price response.
Consequently, the responses of societies and governments would
likely be more extreme. A larger number of countries would probably
experience civil unrest. This would raise the stakes for governments,
and result in more states intervening. In such a scenario, Thailand
– a crucial rice exporter – might limit exports to contain domestic
rice prices for example33. Reponses might also be more extreme
– for example, governments that apply export taxes or quotas in
the 2016 scenario might impose outright export bans. In fragile
political contexts where household food insecurity is high, civil unrest
might spill over into violence or conflict. The Middle East and North
Africa region is of particular systemic concern, given its exposure to
international price volatility and risk of instability, its vulnerability
to import disruption and the potential for interruption of energy
exports34.

|

9

5. How would a plausible worst case scenario impact on
societies, economies and the environment?
The preceding section set out a plausible worst case scenario in 2016,
comprising a weather-related global production shock amplified
through the responses of market actors, that could plausibly result
in a spike of the FAO food price index to over 250 in 2016. Based on
this scenario, it is possible to consider the potential consequences for
human populations and national economies. Information on possible
country level impacts was collected through an expert interview
process. An “Interview Questionnaire” was developed and a panel
of experts from academia/research institutions, government and
the private sector were interviewed about the likely impacts in Brazil,
China, Egypt, Ethiopia, Europe, India, Russia, Saudi Arabia, and the
United States. The country selection criteria are provided in Annex C.
This analysis revealed the following broad expectations of how
the plausible worst case scenario might unfold at the national and
societal level. These are highly consistent with the impacts observed
during the 2007/8 and 2010/11 price spikes.
The hardest impacts would be felt by import dependent
developing countries, particular in Sub-Saharan Africa. These
countries would be expected to experience the most pronounced
short-term deteriorations in poverty rates and nutrition security.
At the economy level, impacts would likely include inflation,
deteriorations in the balance of payments and budgetary pressures
arising from higher food subsidies and social transfers.

Other import dependent countries could experience social
unrest. In particular, in the wake of the Arab Spring and ongoing
instability in the region, the highly import dependent countries of the
Middle East and North Africa region could be particularly vulnerable.
Impacts on major economies would be muted. Consumers in
large industrialised countries such as the US and EU, where food
represents a small share of household expenditures, would be
relatively unaffected36. The crop sectors of these economies, and
other major agricultural producers, would likely benefit from higher
prices, though other sectors could suffer. Poor food consumers in
China would likely be relatively unaffected due to government
intervention to buffer these households from food price inflation
through the use of strategic reserves and price controls.
The supply response may have negative consequences in the
longer term. In response to the price spike, agricultural output
would likely increase through a combination of extensification and
intensification. In the short-term, this would increase supply and
help stocks to recover, facilitating a decline in food prices. However, if
extensification occurred at the expense of high carbon value and/or
high biodiversity value land such as forest, this could have long-term
environmental costs. Similarly, unsustainable intensification could
degrade soils, deplete freshwater supplies and increase greenhouse
gas emissions and eutrophication. The risk of unsustainable
production responses is likely to be higher in the event of a dramatic
price spike, with potential long-term consequences for the resilience
of food production.

istockphoto.com

10

|

6. Key recommendations for increasing resilience to
production shocks at global and local levels
We have argued that the risk of a serious weather-related shock
to global food production appears to be increasing rapidly due to
climate change. Such an event could have serious implications for
the stability of global grain markets and human security in vulnerable
countries. Below we set out five broad areas where action can begin
to be taken in order to address this.

6.1 Better understand the risks
More research is needed to understand and quantify the risks set
out in this paper. Our assessment is that they are non-trivial and
increasing, but our knowledge of how extreme weather may be
connected across the world, and hence the precise probability
of multiple bread basket failures, is limited by available model
simulations. Modelling limitations also constrain our ability to
understand how production shocks translate into short run price
impacts. Specific opportunities include:
• High-resolution global climate model runs using stationary present
day radiative forcing, with an ensemble size that is sufficient for
probabilistic analysis of extreme event risk. Similar stationary
forcing runs for snapshots of future forcing would also be needed.

• Agreeing international rules to limit the scope for unilateral export
controls in the agriculture sector.
• Developing mechanisms to increase the flexibility of biofuel
mandates.
• Research to identify critical geographical pinch points in
international trade and approaches to address their vulnerability,
such as investment in infrastructure or plurilateral agreements to
maintain sea lanes for example.

6.4 Bolster national resilience to market shocks
Governments should also consider policies to bolster national
resilience to international market shocks. This is a particularly
important policy agenda for import dependent developing countries
with high numbers of poor food consumers, and/or high risk of
political instability. The precise mix of appropriate policy measures will
vary according to national context. Options include:
• Investing in strategic storage.
• ‘De-risking’ imports through, for example, diversification of supply
or use of forward contracts.

• Development of economic modelling to dynamically capture
the transmission of shocks through the trade network, and the
impacts of stock levels on price elasticities and different trade
responses such as export controls or panic buying on short run
prices.

• Developing methodologies to measure and monitor household
vulnerability and using these to design and target interventions
such as social protection or safety net programmes.

• Development of crop modelling to better incorporate on-going
adaptation responses, physiological mechanisms, genetic
variation and improvement in response to extreme growing
conditions.

All are likely to entail cost and many may present significant
implementation challenges. It is also noteworthy that, unlike those
set out in 6.3, these interventions need not necessarily contribute to
overall system resilience. For example, increasing domestic production
should improve system resilience at the margin and in the short-term,
but may be environmentally unsustainable. If the objective is to use
export restrictions to secure output for domestic consumption in the
event of a price spike, the consequence for system resilience will be
negative. It is important to find ways to strike an appropriate balance
among competing objectives, and to identify approaches that
minimize negative effects in other policy areas.

6.2 Explore opportunities for coordinated risk
management
As knowledge emerges regarding plausible worst case scenarios,
it will be possible for governments, international institutions and
businesses to develop contingency plans and establish early warning
systems with agreed response protocols. Other opportunities include
coordinated management of emergency and/or strategic reserves.

6.3 Improve the functioning of international markets
History demonstrates that the actions of market participants in
response to production losses, or the behaviours of other actors,
are a crucial determinant of price impacts. Other problems that
can exacerbate price spikes include low levels of stocks relative to
consumption, poor transparency of market information and physical
limitations on trade such as infrastructural constraints. Interventions
to reduce the risk of extreme price responses include:
• Improving the quality and accessibility of key market data, not
least estimates of public and private stockholdings. Building on
the recent success of the Agricultural Market Information System
will be important in this regard.

• Investing in domestic production (its amount and diversity) to
reduce dependency on imports.

6.5 Adapt agriculture for a changing climate
Demand for food, at a global level, is increasing faster than agricultural
yields are growing37. Agriculture therefore faces a triple challenge.
Productivity – at a global level - must be increased by reversing
declines in yield growth and closing the gap between actual and
attainable yields in the developing world, whilst also reducing its
environmental impact. However, given the increasing risk of extreme
weather, this cannot come at the expense of production resilience.
Increases in productivity, sustainability and resilience to climate
change are required. This will require significant investment from the
public and private sectors, as well as new cross-sector collaborations
between scientists, agriculture, water and environmental specialists,
technology providers, policy-makers and civil engineers among others.

|

11

EXTREME WEATHER AND RESILIENCE
• Isolated crises have occurred before: for example, in 1988/89 there was a significant
drought related impact on the yields of maize and soybean, and in 2002/03 drought
impacted wheat in Europe, Russia, India, and China; rice in India.

OPERATING
CONTEXT

2016…
…by 2026 ?

• Escalating demand for food
• Trade volume and interdependencies amplify shocks
• Crop production concentrated in global regions,
increasing exposure to extreme weather risks
• Reduced self sufficiency in China for cereals
• Increasingly inelastic demand

MULTIPLE BREADBASKET FAILURE
EXTREME WEATHER
disrupts production

ESCALATING PANIC
exacerbates crisis

IMPACTS:	  the	  hardest	  economic,	  social	  and	  p
dependent	  countries,	  par9cularly	  in	  Sub-­‐Sah
PRICE volatility
be
EXPORT likely	  
bans
• As cereal prices climb, export bans
are imposed

• Poor Indian monsoon, reduces
wheat crop in India and China

• Countries impose tariff reductions
or consumption subsidies

• Early Spring thaw-freeze in Black
sea area affects wheat crop

• China and Argentina raise export
taxes on Soybean and Maize

• Summer drought in N. America
affects maize and wheat
forecasts

• The US does not waive the
ethanol mandate
• Hoarding and further export
restrictions in SE Asia
• Further export bans are imposed

• Heat wave and drought in
Europe affects wheat crop
• Indian monsoon second failure,
causes rice harvest concerns

Import Restrictions

• Low stock to use ratio raises
concerns of availability

KEY
RECOMMENDATIONS

• Adapt agriculture to account for climate extremes
• Better understand the risks by improving climate,
economic and crop modelling tools
• Better coordinate risk management
• Do not impose export restrictions

• The above visualisation represents a fictional, but plausible 2016 scenario
outlined in the Resilience Taskforce summary report.
• Text in red indicates how the scenario could develop further in a 2026 situation.
Figure 4: A visual summary of the scenarios presented in the report.
12

|

OF THE GLOBAL FOOD SYSTEM
• The level of risk is growing: evidence suggests that the risk of a 1-in-100 year production shock
event from extreme weather, could increase to 1-in-30 year or more in the next few decades.
• Extremes are where the greatest impacts from climate change will be felt, but predicting the
frequency and intensity of extreme events is extremely challenging.
•
•
•
•
•

Key Food import states, economically and politically unstable
Greater interdependencies
Production struggles to keep pace with demand
Underinvestment in exporting region infrastructure
Recovery of oil prices

POLITICAL
• Social unrest experienced; Middle
East and North Africa particularly
vulnerable.

poli9cal	  impacts	  are	  likely	  to	  be	  felt	  Reduced
by	  import	  
Resilience
ECONOMIC
haran	  Africa.	  Major	  economy	  impacts	  would	  
e	  muted.	  
IMPACTS: the hardest economic,
social and political impacts are likely to be
felt by import dependent countries,
particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa. Major
economy impacts would likely be muted.

SOCIAL

• FAO food prices hit 250 and prices
of affected grains go up 3x.
• Country level budgetary pressures
experienced
• Poverty rates increase
• Inflation and deterioration in the
balance of payments

• Deterioration in nutritional security
• Government intervention (e.g. in
China) may protect some poor
food consumers

•
•
•
•
•

Better understand how responses can amplify shocks
Improve function of international markets
Bolster national resilience to market shocks
Make biofuel mandates more flexible
Implement mechanisms to protect low income, fragile countries

• Intensification and extensification
of agriculture
• Degradation of biodiversity, soil
and water resources

• Increase in GHG emissions and
degradation of landscape carbon
• Destabilisation of governments
• Increase in regional migration
(internal and external)
• Reduction in global stocks

Increased
Vulnerability

• The scenario originated from the isolated crises outlined above in 1988/89 and
2002/03, occurring simultaneously.

|

13

Appendix
Contributors to report and attendees at workshops in Chicago (C)
and London (L)

The following have been interviewed to date as part of this work:

• John Beghin, Iowa State University (C)

• Rob Bailey, Chatham House, UK

• Judy Buttriss, British Nutrition Foundation (L)

• Nancy DeVore, Bunge Global, USA

• Riaz Bhunnoo, Global Food Security Programme (C,L)

• Karimah Hudda, Mondelez, Canada

• Chris Brown, ASDA (L)

• Jonathan Horrell, Mondelez, Canada

• Kris Carlson, Thomson Reuters (C)

• Gordon Friend, DEFRA, UK

• Erik Chavez, Imperial College London (C,L)

• Corey Cherr, Thomson Reuters, USA

• Nancy DeVore, DHF Team LLC (C,L)

• Chris Brown, ASDA Walmart, UK

• Kenneth Donaldson, Actuary (L)

• Jerry Hjelle, Monsanto, USA

• Rowan Douglas, Willis Research Network (C,L)

• Jay Gulledge, Oakridge National Laboratory, USA

• Gordon Friend, Defra (C,L)

• Marc Sadler, World Bank, USA

• Olivia Gray, Willis (C)

• Puvan J. Selvanathan, UN Agriculture / Global Compact, USA

• Jay Gulledge, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (C,L)

• Samir Saran, ORF, India

• Jerry Hjelle, Monsanto (L)

• Tom Lumpkin, CGIAR, Mexico 		

• Jonathan Horrell, Mondelez (L)

• Jerry Skees, University of Kentucky, USA

• Karimah Hudda, Mondelez (C)

• Professor Paul Teng, National Institute of Education, Singapore

• Molly Jahn, University of Wisconsin–Madison (C,L)
• Daniel Krohn, Iowa State University (L)

• Stephen Lorimer, Ministry of Business, Innovation and
Employment, New Zealand

• Andrew Leakey, University of Illinois (C,L)

• Jonatan Lassa, United Nations University, Singapore

• Marc Levy, Center for International Earth Science Information
Network (C,L)

• Dave Gustavsen, ILSI, USA

• Victoria Loughlan, Scottish Government*

• Mark Rose Grant, IFPRI, USA

• Bob Phillipson, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (L)

• Don Seville, Sustainable Food Lab, USA

• George Prpich, Cranfield University (C,L)

• Chris Joknik, Oxfam, USA		

• Sherman Robinson, CGIAR (L)

• Gerald Nelson, University of Illinois, USA 		

• David Robson, Scottish Government (C,L)

• John Antle, Oregan State University, USA

• Simon Sharpe, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (C,L)

• Erik Chavez, Imperial College, UK

• Lucy Stanbrough, Lloyds (L)

• Margaret Walsh, USDA, USA

• Jack Westwood, British Consulate-General, Chicago (C,L)

• Eija Pehu, World Bank, USA

*Contributed after the workshops had taken place

• Mukul Sanwal, Institute for Defence Studies & Analyses / UMass
Amherst, India

• Zhang Hongzhou, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

• James Jones, University of Florida, USA

• Arunabha Ghosh, CEEW, India
• Naomi Hossain, University of Sussex, Indonesia
• Robin Lougee, IBM, USA
• Biraj Patnaik, Supreme Court Commissioners Office on Right to
Food, India
• John Magrath, Oxfam, UK
• Tassew Waldehanna, Addis Ababa University, Ethiopia
• Anne Roulin, Nestle, Switzerland
• Felino Lansigan, Univ. of the Philippines Los Banos, Philippines
• Simon Ticehurst, Oxfam, Brazil
• Elias Fereres, Irrigation Science, Journal, Spain
• Sir Gordon Conway, Imperial College, UK
• Joanna Syroka, WFP, USA
• JohnIngram, Oxford University, UK

14

|

• Bruce Babcock, Iowa State University, USA
• Helen Edmundsen, DfID, UK
• Renato Maluf, Rural Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
• Claudia Schmitt, Rural Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
• Zhang Hongzhou, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
• Jikun Huang, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Institute of
Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, China
• Tarek Tawfik, ENCC Food Security and Safety Sub-Council, Egypt
• Amina Ghanem, Egyptian National Competitiveness Council,
Egypt
• James McCann, Boston University, USA
• Bart Minten, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI),
Ethiopia
• Chris Brown, ASDA/Walmart, USA
• Biraj Patnaik, Supreme Court Commissioners Office on Right to
Food, India
• Yury Safonov, Moscow Higher School of Economics, Russia
• Blair Fortner, Monsanto Company, USA
A workshop hosted by Chatham House on February 11th 2015
refined the Responses report. Those attending the workshop were:
• Nick Silver, Institute of Actuaries
• Paul McMahon, Associate Fellow, Chatham House / Managing
Director, SLM Partners LLP
• Gordon Friend, DEFRA
• Maria Lacunza, DEFRA
• James Ballantyne, FCO
• Rowan Douglas, Willis Research
• Olivia Gray, Willis Research
• Laura Wellesley, Chatham House

|

15

References
1

GFS Insight paper on Food Price Spikes (2014) http://www.foodsecurity.ac.uk/assets/pdfs/1404-gfs-insight-food-price-spikes.pdf

2

COULIBALY, A,L, (2013) The Food Price Increase of 2010–2011: Causes and Impacts Background Paper No. 2013-02-E
http://www.parl.gc.ca/Content/LOP/ResearchPublications/2013-02-e.htm

3

LAGI, M., et al. 2011. The food crises and political instability in North Africa and the Middle East. arXiv preprint arXiv:1108.2455;
BELLEMARE, M. F. 2015. Rising Food Prices, Food Price Volatility, and Social Unrest. Am. J. Agricultural Economics, 97, 1-21.
NATALINI, D.,et al. , ‘Quantitative assessment of approaches to measuring likelihood of food riots in countries’, 2015,
Sustainability, 7 (4), 4360-4385

4

If the temperature, or rainfall, is measured each day in a location for a long time, the daily conditions will describe a frequency
distribution: the climate. This distribution will have common weather close to the average and the rarer, or extreme, weather will
be in the tails of the distribution. Extreme weather is typically high-impact.

5

IPCC (2014) 5th Assessment, reports available at https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/

6

HANSEN, J et al (2012) “Perception of climate change” PNAS www.pnas.orc/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1205276109

7

Turn down the heat: climate extremes, regional impacts, and the case for resilience. World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/
cura-ted/ en/2013/06/17862361/turn-down-heat-climate-extremes-regional-impacts-case-resilience-full-report

8

See Hansen (op. cit.) and for a brief review COUMOU, D. & S. RAHMSTORF (2012) “A decade of weather extremes” Nature Climate
Change DOI 10.1038/NCLIMATE1452 and IPCC (2012) A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA; CHALLINOR, A., et al..
2014. A meta-analysis of crop yield under climate change and adaptation. Nature Climate Change, 4, 287-291

9

For a synopsis of how weather may affect agricultural production see http://www.foodsecurity.ac.uk/assets/pdfs/frp-severeweather-uk-food-chain-resilience.pdf.

10 MIN, Seung-Ki et al (2011) Human contribution to more-intense precipitation extremes Nature 470, 378-381
11 GUILYARDI, E et al (2012) A first look at ENSO in CMIP5 from http://www.gfdl.noaa.gov/~atw/yr/2012/guilyardi_etal_2012_clivex.
pdf
12 P32 in FORSTER, P et al (2012) Food Security: near future projections of the impact of drought in Asia. Working Paper from the
Centre for Low Carbon Futures. Available at http://www.lowcarbonfutures.org/
13 http://www.foodsecurity.ac.uk/assets/pdfs/frp-severe-weather-uk-food-chain-resilience.pdf
14

CAI, W., et al. 2014. Increasing frequency of extreme El Nino events due to greenhouse warming. Nature Clim. Change, 4, 111116.

15 FOLEY, J. A. et al. 2011. Solutions for a cultivated planet. Nature, 478, 337-342.
16

https://www.agmip.org/ag-grid/ggcmi/

17

O’Leary, G. J., et al. (2015), Response of wheat growth, grain yield and water use to elevated CO2 under a Free-Air CO2
Enrichment (FACE) experiment and modelling in a semi-arid environment. Global Change Biology. doi: 10.1111/gcb.12830

18 Feng, Z., Rütting, T., Pleijel, H., Wallin, G., Reich, P.B., Kammann, C.I., Newton, P.C.D., Kobayashi, K., Luo, Y., Uddling, J., 2015.
Constraints to nitrogen acquisition of terrestrial plants under elevated CO2. Global Change Biol. (in press); Myers, S.S., Zanobetti,
A., Kloog, I., Huybers, P., Leakey, A.D., Bloom, A.J., Carlisle, E., Dietterich, L.H., Fitzgerald, G., Hasegawa, T., 2014. Increasing CO2
threatens human nutrition. Nature 510, 139-142.
19 May, R.M., 2013. Networks and webs in ecosystems and financial systems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
a-Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences 371, 20120376.
20 Page 11 in Puma, M. J. et al. (2015). Assessing the evolving fragility of the global food system. Environmental Research
Letters,10(2), 024007.
21 World commodity prices are priced in dollars. Depreciation of the dollar leads to cheaper prices in other currencies. This leads
to either reduction in supply or an increase in demand, which then drives up world prices. P. CHARLEBOIS & N. HAMANN (2010)
The consequences of a strong depreciation of the USD on agricultural markets Catalogue A38-4/21-2010E-PDF Project 10-055-r
http://www.agr.gc.ca/pol/index_e.php
22 Scenarios are described in italic text
23 Russia and Ukraine each imposed export restrictions (comprising taxes, quotas and bans) on wheat during the 2007/8 food price
crisis and in 2010/11 following a poor harvest. See for example, SHARMA 2011. Food Export Restrictions: Review of the 2007-2010
Experience and Considerations for Disciplining Restrictive Measures, FAO Commodity and Trade Policy Research Working Paper
No.32, Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

16

|

24 All of these countries imposed export controls on wheat during the 2007/8 crisis. See Sharma (2011).
25 At the end of 2008, 43 of 81 countries surveyed had reduced import tariffs or custom fees on agricultural commodities, including
those listed here. See DEMEKE et al 2009. Country responses to the food security crisis: Nature and preliminary implications of the
policies pursued, Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
26 All four countries implemented rice export controls during the 2007/8 crisis, Sharma (2011).
27 In 2008, Argentina increased export taxes on soybean and maize as international prices rose. China increased export taxes on
maize. Sharma (2011).
28 In 2012 with maize prices at record highs following the worst drought in half a century, the US refused to waive the ethanol
mandate (which consumes roughly 40 per cent of the maize harvest) despite petitions from the livestock sector, the food and
beverage sector and other governments.
29 All four imposed export restrictions on rice during 2008. Sharma (2011).
30 Vietnam, Cambodia and Indonesia all imposed rice export bans in 2008 (Sharma, 2011) and DAWE (ed.) 2010 The Rice Crisis:
Markets, Policies and Food Security. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and Earthscan.
31 Low global stock-to-use ratios appear to be a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for international price spikes. When cereal
stocks are low, any shock to supply or demand cannot be easily accommodated through releases and so adjustment occurs
through the price mechanism, leading to price spikes. The precise threshold is a subject of debate, but a rule of thumb for cereals is
approximately 20%. See Wright 2009. International Grain Reserves and Other Instruments to Address Volatility in Grain Markets,
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5028, Washington DC: The World Bank.
32 OECD-FAO 2013. OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2013, Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
33 The 2016 scenario assumed no response from Thailand. In the near term, this is a reasonable assumption given the size of the
national reserve that Thailand has accumulated. By 2026, this may well have reduced. Although Thailand in the end did not apply
export controls during the 2008 crisis, the government publicly discussed the idea.
34 Bailey 2013. Edible Oil: Food Security in the Gulf, Chatham House.
35 Wright 2011. Biofuels and Food Security: Time to Consider Safety Valves?, International Food and Agricultural Trade Policy Council;
Lee et al 2012. Resources Futures, Chatham House.
36 This is on average. Analysis of UK purchases following the 2007/8 food price spike show a complex pattern of changes in response
to food price increases: as prices increased UK households bought 4.2% less. They also traded down to save money, by buying
cheaper alternatives. Nonetheless, trading down didn’t compensate prices rises and overall the food bill for an average family
rose and was 12% more in 2011 than 2007. The poorest spent 17% more in 2011 compared to 2007, so their relative food bill
increased by 40% more than average (https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/family-food-2011).
37 BAJZELJ, B.et al. 2014. Importance of food-demand management for climate mitigation. Nature Clim. Change, 4, 924-929.

|

17

Available related reports

Global Food Security (GFS) is a multi-agency programme
bringing together the main UK funders of research and
training relating to food. GFS publications provide balanced
analysis of food security issues on the basis of current
evidence, for use by policy-makers and practitioners.
For further information please visit:
www.foodsecurity.ac.uk
Email: info@foodsecurity.ac.uk

