South Sudan: The 2015 Rainfall Seasonal Analysis

December 2015

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

HIGHLIGHTS
• The rainfall season in South Sudan is now coming to an end, with only southern areas anticipated to receive
lighter rains until the start of the next rainfall season around March 2016.
• Moderately above average seasonal rainfall was observed in the central, south-eastern and northern parts
of the country while moderately below average rainfall was observed mostly in southern Jonglei state.
Since October, the continued favourable rain are expected to have positive impact on the second season
crops of the dual cropping areas of Equatoria, after significant mid season drier than average conditions.
• In November, there was widespread above average rainfall across central and southern Unity, southern
Jonglei, Central and Eastern Equatoria States. Vegetation cover from satellite data is also at much above
average levels. This is in line with field report which are indicating the improvement of crop conditions,
and water and pasture condition for the livestock in the pastoralist areas.
• The Prospects of the second agriculture season in the Greater Equatoria are moderate to good. So far,
green harvest of the second agriculture season are on going in bimodal rainfall areas.
• The on-going El Nino event is now at its peak and is very likely to extend into the first quarter of 2016.
Thus, the recent above average rainfall observed in Central and Eastern Equatoria states should continue
for a while, providing better prospects for pastoralists.

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

Overall Seasonal Rainfall Performance
Seasonal rainfall performance
Up to end of November, seasonal rainfall was
moderately above average in northern parts of
the country (Bahr el Ghazal, Warrap and Upper
Nile). Little change is expected now since
limited or no more rainfall is expected until next
season.
The southern half of Jonglei and some parts of
Lakes had a drier than average season.

Overall, Central and East Equatoria had an
above average rainfall season. This is mostly
due to late abundant rainfall which is having a
positive impact on the second season crops of
the dual cropping areas of Equatorias. This is in
line with information from field reports.
Map 1: Seasonal cumulative rainfall until end of November 2015, as a percentage of the 20-year average.
Hashed pattern indicates main agricultural areas. Brown shades indicate below-average rainfall; blue
shades indicate above-average seasonal rainfall.

However, there was also poor distribution of
rainfall as the current favourable rainfall was
preceded by drier than average periods (see
subsequent explanations).

Timing of the season
The rainfall season of 2015 is now approaching its end and only small amounts are to be expected in the southernmost areas of the
country until the new season starts again from about early March onwards.

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

Recent Rainfall Performance
Recent Rainfall Patterns
During November, drier than average conditions were
registered in Jonglei-Upper Nile and the borders of
Bahr-el-Ghazal and Western Equatoria. However,
these late season deficits are of little importance as
in most of these regions the bulk of the harvest was
already completed.

The south of the country in contrast, has enjoyed
wetter than average conditions, mainly in Central and
East Equatoria, confirming the information from the
field. Reports from Eastern Equatoria indicate that
better November rains improved crop prospects in
Magwi, West Ikotos and Budi, alleviating the effects
of drier than average conditions in August and
September.

Map 2: 30 days cumulative rainfall until 30 of November 2015, as a percentage of the 20-year average.
Hashed pattern indicates main agricultural areas. Brown shades for below-average rainfall; blue shades for aboveaverage seasonal rainfall.

In WBS, harvest of groundnut and bambara nut is
completed. Sesame’s harvesting and processing is
ongoing while the good performance of the long
maturing sorghum in most areas of Raja and Wau
counties leads to expectations of good yields.

In Central Equatoria, though first season stocks are depleted at household level, some locations have already started harvesting the second season short
term crops (maize and groundnut).
In pastoralists areas, the late favourable rainfall resulted in improved water and pasture condition for grazing of animals. The volume of milk also increased.
This recovery in rainfall is very important for livestock health, in particular considering the pronouncedly drier than average middle season rainfall (July to
September), even if some areas (southern Jonglei) remain in overall seasonal deficit.

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

Vegetation Status
Vegetation Status
The late abundant rains in Central and East
Equatoria have a strong effect in vegetation
cover which is now significantly above average
levels. Indeed field observation confirms good
status of pasture and water availability for
livestock in these regions.
In some areas this also brought benefits to the
second crops (Magwi and Budi), but in more
eastern areas, little recovery was seen and
crops were significantly affected by mid season
dryness.

Map 3: Late November 2015 Vegetation Index as a percentage of the 12-year average. Hashed pattern indicates main agricultural
areas. Orange shades for below-average; green shades for above-average vegetation.

After drier than average periods midway
through the year, vegetation shows good
recovery in Jonglei where below average
patterns are still prevalent though already
showing signs of return to average levels.

In several states, the main harvest is completed and production is anticipated to have mixed performance compared to last season. In
Western Equatoria, the green harvest of maize and groundnuts (second season crop) is ongoing. In addition, reports from Central
Equatoria indicate continued availability of second season green harvests in most markets around the state (groundnut, maize and
vegetables).

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

El Nino Event and Seasonal Rainfall Forecast
The El Nino Event of 2015-2016

Rainfall forecasts for January – February 2016

An El Nino event is officially active since
March 2015. It is now at its peak and
should start dissipating after the first
quarter of 2016.

Forecasts from ECMWF (January to March 2016) indicate normal rainfall for South Sudan.

Historically, El Nino events impact South
Sudan, leading to growing season rainfall
deficits during the July-September period
mostly in more South-East areas.

In practice, there will only be significant rainfall in Eastern Equatoria, specially in border
areas with Kenya and Uganda as a result of the El Nino enhanced rainfall in East Africa. This
will continue to benefit late planted and second crops and importantly will provide good
perspectives for pastoralists in these regions.

However, these same areas later benefit
from wetter than average conditions as a
result of the spread of the typical El Nino
enhanced rainfall from East Africa. This
has been taking place since October,
mostly in Central and Eastern Equatoria.
So far this season has conformed to this
general pattern quite well.

ECMWF forecast for January – March 2016 rainfall.
Green shades = wetter than average conditions more likely. Brown shades = drier than average conditions more likely

Data Sources:
Rainfall: CHIRPS, Climate Hazards Group, UCSB
Vegetation: MODIS NDVI, EOSDIS-NASA
Land Cover: FAO GLC-Share

Processing:
VAM software components, ArcGIS

For more information, please contact:
Raul Cumba (VAM South Sudan) - raul.cumba@wfp.org
Rogerio Bonifacio (VAM HQ) - rogerio.bonifacio@wfp.org

+211 920002729
+39 06 6513 3917

