South Sudan: The 2015 Rainfall Seasonal Analysis
September 2015

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

HIGHLIGHTS

• The growing season of 2015 in South Sudan started well due to early favourable rainfall, with earlier than
average or timely planting across most of Western Equatoria, Greater Bahr-el-Ghazal, northern areas and
Upper Nile. In Central Equatoria and some eastern areas of the country, moderate delays were noticed, but
without much consequence.

• The rainfall season continued normally across the country until late June. Field reports indicate that in
bimodal areas (west and south west), first-season harvests have started, and second-season activities are
underway, as rainfall remained close to average until now.
• However, in July and August, significant rainfall deficits extended across Jonglei, eastern Lakes, Eastern
Equatoria, and Central Equatoria. A continuation of these conditions may have serious impacts on crop
performance in these regions.
• A developing El Nino event and pessimistic forecasts for September to December rainfall in the northern
half of the country, raise the possibility of drier than average conditions affecting late maturing crops in
Lakes, West Bahr-el-Ghazal and Upper Nile. Perspectives for the second season planting in the Greater
Equatoria are less clear. So far the season is developing normally in some areas but continued monitoring
is required.

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

Map 1: Seasonal cumulative rainfall until end of August 2015, as a percentage of the 20-year average.
Hashed pattern indicates main agricultural areas. Brown shades indicate below-average rainfall; blue
shades indicate above-average seasonal rainfall.

Map 2: 30 days cumulative rainfall until 31 of August 2015, as a percentage of the 20-year average.
Hashed pattern indicates main agricultural areas. Brown shades indicate below-average rainfall; blue
shades indicate above-average seasonal rainfall.

Seasonal rainfall performance
Until end of August, seasonal rainfall was moderately above average in western and northern parts of the country (Western and Northern Bahr el Ghazal states, as well
as Upper Nile state) and moderately below average in south-eastern regions (south and east of Jonglei and areas of Central and Eastern Equatoria States). This broadly
favourable rains are expected to have a positive impact on the agricultural season. This is in line with field reports information.
However, a closer look at recent rainfall performance reveals strong rainfall deficits during the month of August (see Map 2) across most of Jonglei, East Equatoria, as
well as parts of Lakes and Central Equatoria. In fact, these deficits have started from early July – this agrees with field reports of rainfall irregularity, prolonged dry spell
observed in Unity State, Jonglei (Uror and some parts of Nyirol), Eastern Equatoria (greater Kapoeta, part of Magwi and Ikwoto counties) and Central Equatoria. In
addition, there was a short dry spell reported in Western Bank Counties of Panyikang, Fashoda and Manyo.
The impact of these deficits on the seasonal total rainfall (Map 1) is not so apparent since the early season rainfall (up to June) was quite favourable and above
average.

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

Left: Date of onset of the growing season compared to average. Pinks and yellows to reds for delayed growing seasons, green shades for earlier than average growing seasons.
Right: Late August 2015 Vegetation Index as a percentage of the 12-year average. Hashed pattern indicates main agricultural areas. Orange shades for below-average; green shades for above-average vegetation.

Onset of Season and Vegetation Status
The growing season has started earlier than usual in western areas (Western Equatoria and Greater Bahr-el-Ghazal) as well as along the border with Sudan and in Upper Nile
state, due to good rains during the earlier stages of the season. In central and eastern areas (Central Equatoria, parts of Jonglei) the season started moderately later than
usual, due to drier than average conditions in April. Overall, no significant perturbations of the planting dates are noticeable.
The recent drier than average conditions in July and August, led to below average vegetation developing along the north, central and eastern parts of South Sudan (Upper
Nile, Unity, Jonglei and East Equatoria). This tendency has been worsening progressively as the season advances. This ties in with field reports of prolonged dry spells affecting
the crop performance in Upper Nile, Unity State, Jonglei, Eastern Equatoria and Central Equatoria. In addition it will impact negatively the planting of the second season crops
in Central Equatoria. Preliminaries results from FSNMS Round 16 (July 2015) indicates that the majority of HHs (41%) report shortage of rain as the main challenges of crop
production this season, followed by pests and diseases, reported by 18%, and shortage of seeds reported by 16%.
In the bimodal rainfall areas of western South Sudan, the vegetation conditions indicate a normal season and the first-season harvests are underway.

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015
The El Nino Event of 2015-2016

Rainfall forecasts for September-December 2015

An El Nino event is officially active since March 2015. After remaining
at relatively weak levels until May 2015, it is now intensifying and
should peak in the last quarter of 2015 and disappear from February
2016 onwards.

According to GHACOF 41, for the coming September to December 2015 period, there is increased
likelihood of near normal to below normal rainfall forecast for most of South Sudan (Zone II) except the
south-east where there is Increased likelihood of above normal to near normal rainfall. If these forecasts
are realized, this may impact negatively on development of late maturing crops in Lakes, Upper Nile, and
West Bahr-el-Ghazal, but provide favourable conditions for the second crop season in most of Great
Equatoria States. Note, however other forecasts are somewhat more pessimistic.

Historically, El Nino events have an impact on South Sudan leading to
growing season rainfall deficits and poor vegetation development. The
recent drier than average conditions observed in South Sudan could
be related to impact of the current El Niño

Probability of an El Nino event (red bars) vs neutral conditions (green) and La Nina
(blue). El Nino probabilities remain above 90% throughout the Sahelian growing season.

Seasonal rainfall forecasts for September to December 2015 rainfall – GHACOF – 41.

Data Sources:
Rainfall: CHIRPS, Climate Hazards Group, UCSB
Vegetation: MODIS NDVI, EOSDIS-NASA
Land Cover: FAO GLC-Share

Processing:
VAM software components, ArcGIS

For more information, please contact:
Raul Cumba (VAM South Sudan) - raul.cumba@wfp.org
Rogerio Bonifacio (VAM HQ) - rogerio.bonifacio@wfp.org

+211 920002729
+39 06 6513 3917


