WFP South Sudan
Food and Nutrition Security Update
Photo: ©WFP/George Fominyen

Special Report — 1 December 2016

Highlights
 3.6 million people estimated to be severely food insecure, denoting the highest historic levels of food
insecurity during the harvest season.
 South Sudan food security and nutrition situation likely to further worsen in the January to April period;
4.6 million people projected to be severely food insecure between January to April 2017.
 Ravaging economic crisis and widespread insecurity impeding improvements in food and nutrition
security situation.

Overview
Following the outbreak of conflict in Juba in July 2016, heightened tensions and fighting have spread to
several other parts of the country, including the once peaceful and stable Greater Equatoria region, which
serves as the main bread basket of the country. Conflict in South Sudan has pushed over a million people
into neighbouring countries as refugees while a further 1.87 million people are internally displaced—of
which about 200,000 people are living in UN protection of civilian (POC) sites. The economic decline has
resulted in the highest inflation rate in the world at 836 percent in October 2016. Further, the depreciation
of the South Sudanese Pound (SSP), falling from SSP16/US$ in August 2015 to SSP74/US$ in November
2016, and shortage of foreign currency have negatively affected the humanitarian situation. Conflict and
insecurity spreading across the country have cut off trade routes and continue to impede commercial
imports. Economic activities have been affected as households’ access to farm land has been restricted due
to insecurity, worsening the food security situation across the country.

Current Food Security & Nutrition Situation
The food security and nutrition situation in South Sudan has deteriorated progressively since the conflict
started in 2013. The July 2016 conflict, subsequent heightened tensions and renewed clashes across the
country have further aggravated already overwhelming needs. Recent analysis indicates that an estimated
3.6 million people to be severely food insecure 1 between October and December 2016, the highest
levels experienced in South Sudan at harvest time. Among these, an estimated 600,000 people are in the
main urban centres across the country. In both rural and urban areas, the food insecure population has at
least doubled compared to the same time last year. The severity of food insecurity is highest in Northern
Bahr el Ghazal, with 59 percent of the total population facing severe food insecurity, followed by Unity state
with 56 percent, Western Bahr el Ghazal with 47 percent, and Central Equatoria with 33 percent.
in

South

Sudan,
Crisis

Emergency

Thousands

The scale of food insecurity remains unprecedented
improvements that are typical of the harvest
season. In the Greater Equatoria region, which is 6,000
normally the primary food basket for the country, food 5,000
security is expected to worsen unusually due to conflict
and insecurity since July that has prevented the 4,000
population from accessing their farms.
3,000
The collapse of the macro-economy and subsequent
hyperinflation and shortage of US dollars has eroded
people’s purchasing power, especially the most
vulnerable. The sharp depreciation of the local currency
against the US Dollar has continuously impeded flow of
commercial food imports and resulted in substantial
increases in prices of imported food and non-food items.
1

2..9 million in crisis and 0.7 million in emergency phases of IPC

2,000

seasonal

Catastrophe

5

1,100

30
920

1,045

40
415

1,965

670

40
415

3,285
1,000

despite

3,685

3,670
2,925

2,380

0
Oct - Dec 2015 (prj) Jan - Mar 2016 (prj)

Apr 2016

May - July 2016
(prj)

August - September
2016

October December 2016

Food insecure population under crisis, emergency and humanitarian catastrophe: trends since 2015

Page | 1

Crop harvests in most parts of the country are moderating market prices of key staples (prices decreased
in September by 10 to 50 percent). However, cereal prices are still substantially higher than the same
period last year and the five-year average. In Juba’s Konyokonyo market, sorghum and maize prices are
over 500 percent higher compared to September 2015, and over 1,100 percent higher compared to the
five year period. A combination of average to below average crop production and the continuing economic
crisis in the country characterized by depreciation in the currency, inflation, increasing costs of
transportation and reduced imports, among other factors will keep the prices of imported food at higher
than normal levels. Overall, crop production has been negatively affected by drier than average conditions
during the planting and growing seasons, most notably in the northern part of Eastern Equatoria and
southern part of Jonglei. Furthermore, serious flooding experienced in parts of Jonglei, Warrap and Upper
Nile states continues to inhibit crop production. These factors combined with decreased household
purchasing power and disruption of livelihoods will continue to negatively impact food access by
households, especially in food production deficit locations that rely on markets.
Similarly, the nutrition situation has remained above the 15 percent WHO emergency threshold in
most counties, albeit with some slight improvements akin to a typical harvest season. The multi-causal
nature of malnutrition prevents major improvements in the nutrition situation despite a considerable
nutrition response. In 2016, 31 out of the 39 county level SMART surveys conducted classified malnutrition
levels as critical with two as very critical. The worst affected state, Northern Bahr el Ghazal, held a Global
Acute Malnutrition (GAM) rate of 28.1 percent and a Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) rate of 9 percent.
The vast lack of access to maternal, child and public health services, exacerbated by poor hygiene and
sanitation practices, hyperinflation and high food prices and insecurity will continue to drive the level of
malnutrition across the country.

Food and Nutrition Security Outlook:
January to April 2017
The food security and nutrition situation in South Sudan is likely to worsen between January to April
2017, corresponding with the dry season and start of the lean season: projection based on trend analysis
indicates that around 4.6 million people are likely to be severely food insecure2. This denotes a 62
percent increase when compared to the same season last year and a 28 percent increase when compared
to the current period (October—December 2016). Food and nutrition insecurity is anticipated to further
deteriorate during the peak of the lean season from May to July 2017 to the highest levels ever
in the lean period, unless the humanitarian response is stepped up further to an unprecedented level. The
geographic spread of projected food insecurity based on CARI (Consolidate Approach to Reporting
Indicators of Food Security) is shown in the map in the next page.
The foreseen deterioration can be attributed to a number of factors: these include continuing economic
crisis compounded by spiral price increases, continued inflation, poor harvests and early depletion of
household stocks, continued population displacements resulting from localized conflict, trade flows
hampered by insecurity, disruption of livelihood activities, and impeded investments and, therefore,
revenue generation. Affected households are likely to continue asset stripping and using negative
coping mechanisms, delaying or preventing recovery of already vulnerable livelihoods. Poverty
and food insecurity will likely continue to grow in urban areas and will be further worsened by insecurity,
economic deterioration and disruption of livelihoods, increasing needs throughout the country.
In the Greater Equatoria region, food security is likely to worsen significantly due to the ongoing conflict
that has led to displacement of the local population which has disrupted the second season cropping. It
follows, therefore, that the harvest will be below normal to normal across the country. Distressing levels of
malnutrition are expected, particularly in the Greater Bahr el Ghazal region, Unity state and some parts of
the Greater Equatoria region where the GAM rate is already above the emergency threshold (GAM >15%).

Contacts

2

 WFP VAM—South Sudan

juba.vam@wfp.org

 George Fominyen, Communications Officer

george.fominyen@wfp.org

3.6 million likely to be in crisis and 1.0 million in emergency phases of IPC
www.wfp.org/countries/south-sudan

WFP South Sudan—Special Report

Page | 2

*

WFP’s projection analysis (CARI: Consolidated Approach to Reporting Indicators of Food Security) is based on South Sudan IPC past trend information, population growth rates,
insecurity, economic indicators, harvest projections and WFP food security and nutrition data.

WFP South Sudan—Special Report
1 December 2016

www.wfp.org/countries/south-sudan

Page | 3

