©FAO/Albert Gonzalez Farran

South Sudan
Humanitarian
Response Plan
2018

In South Sudan, the risk of famine remains elevated and food security is
expected to worsen in 2018. It is critical to enable rapid food production
among the most vulnerable communities, protect their livelihoods and
build their resilience, while increasing self-sufficiency.

Objectives

FAO requires

FAO is working with partners in the Food Security and Livelihoods
Cluster to:
• Provide emergency support to protect and rebuild livelihoods during
the main planting and dry seasons to improve the food security of
vulnerable urban and rural populations and reduce the food gap.
• Strengthen the collection, analysis and coordination of food security
and agriculture information.

period

Activities

to assist

3.9 million people
USD 63 million
January – December 2018
Worsening food security
trends linked to continued
conflict have been
compounded by market
failure, internal displacement
and decreasing humanitarian
access. To save lives in
the coming year, the most
vulnerable households need
support to produce
nutritious food for
consumption and sale.

Increase agricultural production
provision of crop and vegetable seeds | distribution of tools | provision of
fishing equipment
Improve animal health
vaccination of livestock | treatment of livestock
Increase access to timely agriculture and food security
information
food security and nutrition analyses | seed security and crop
assessments | market, rainfall and crop production monitoring | coordinate
information sharing with partners

FAO in the 2018 humanitarian appeals South Sudan

Situation analysis

Acute food insecurity situation (January – March 2018)

5.1 million people

SUDAN

severely food insecure

Abyei

20 000 people facing

Northern
Bahr el Ghazal

!
Upper Nile

Unity

Warrap

famine-like conditions at
household level

!

! !
!

ETHIOPIA
Jonglei

Western Bahr el Ghazal
Lakes

CENTRAL
AFRICAN
REPUBLIC

4 million people

! !
Western Equatoria
Eastern Equatoria

D E M O C R AT I C
REPUBLIC
O F T H E CO N G O

displaced by conflict, of which

2 million internally

Central Equatoria

!

K E N YA
U G A N DA

0

150 km

IPC Phase Classification
Famine

Minimal

Emergency

Not analysed

Crisis

Insufficient data

!

Area would likely be at least
one phase worse without
the effects of humanitarian
assistance

Stressed
Source: South Sudan IPC Technical Working Group, September 2017

Impact on food security

Persistent insecurity and massive displacement have led to widespread
disruption of livelihood activities, including agricultural, fisheries and livestock
production, as well as limited access to local food markets among producers,
traders and consumers. Exacerbated by climate extremes and a reduction in
area planted, the national cereal gap has widened. The shortfall of about half a
million tonnes in 2017 is likely to be similar in 2018. Trade and migration routes
have been disrupted, and the risk and occurrence of livestock disease outbreaks
has increased. Economic crisis, marked by drastic hyperinflation and market
failures, has further destabilised food systems and household access to food
and income. Supporting local food production will remain critical to preventing
further deterioration of the food security situation in 2018.

Serge Tissot | FAO Representative | Juba, South Sudan | FAO-South-Sudan@fao.org

CONTACTS

Dominique Burgeon | Director, Emergency and Rehabilitation Division and Strategic Programme Leader – Resilience | Rome, Italy | TCE-Director@fao.org
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

© FAO, 2018 | I8533EN/1/01.18

Humanitarian response succeeded in containing famine soon after it was
declared in February 2017. However, there is an elevated risk of famine
in 2018 if widespread support is not continued. From January to March 2018,
the number of severely food insecure people is likely to climb to 5.1 million
people. This follows the trend seen since conflict began – rates of food
insecurity accelerating even during the harvest season. Food insecurity levels
worsen further with each lean season, a time of year when food stocks are
typically depleted, food prices are at their highest and heavy rains disrupt
markets and restrict humanitarian access. In 2018, the lean season is expected
to start three months earlier than normal. Malnutrition levels remain well
above emergency thresholds in some areas.

