South Sudan

LIVESTOCK
CRISIS

The livestock crisis continues to deepen and spread in
South Sudan. Last December, FAO warned of a
“silent emergency” as the ongoing conflict and
instability undermined the livelihoods of the country’s
agropastoral communities. Today, continued massive
displacement and recurrent insecurity, disrupted
markets, reduced trade, soaring food prices and a
widespread economic downturn have been detrimental
for livestock owners.
Intensive and abnormal migrations due to
insecurity have seriously depleted the health
conditions for animal health throughout the
country. It will take years for these communities
– representing an estimated 65 percent of South
Sudan’s population – to rebuild and strengthen
their herds. By December 2014, when FAO first
issued a Livestock Alert for South Sudan, the
dynamics for the deteriorating livestock situation

1

AUGUST 2015

had already been set into motion. The conflict
divided the country into affected and less
affected areas, the majority of livestock were in
the hardest hit areas and their movement into
more peaceful locations turned the situation into
a nation-wide emergency.
In 2015, Greater Equatoria and Greater Bahr el
Ghazal regions have faced rising pressures and
heightened tensions, with disease outbreaks,
cattle raids and tribal conflicts reaching alarming
rates.
METHODOLOGY
Over the past six months, FAO South Sudan livestock teams have
conducted dozens of disease investigations with the Ministry of
Livestock and Fisheries, including in hot-spot areas and rapidly
responded with interventions across all ten states. FAO teams
engaged in participatory data collection with communities,
conducted focus group discussions with pastoralists and collected
livestock blood samples for laboratory testing.

DISEASE OUTBREAKS

populations cannot be reached with vaccination
and treatment services.
FAO has scaled up efforts to control FMD and
other trans-boundary animal diseases. Diseases
such as Anthrax and contagious caprine
pleuropneumonia, occur frequently in South
Sudan, largely during uncontrolled livestock

Even before the current crisis, South Sudan’s
herds were susceptible to a number of
prevalent diseases, including: foot-and-mouth
disease (FMD), East Coast fever, peste des
petits ruminants (PPR), contagious bovine
pleuropneumonia
(CBPP)
and
trypanosomosis. Abnormal migration patterns
and the concentration of high numbers of
livestock in condensed areas for prolonged
periods have made the spread of diseases
unavoidable.
These endemic diseases, were previously
confined to specific areas and have now crossed
into new territories and infected healthy herds.
For example, East Coast fever, – a disease
transmitted by ticks –was once contained in
Greater Equatoria, but has now spread into
livestock populations in Jonglei and Lakes
States, causing a devastating number of deaths.
Even more alarming is the discovery of a new
FMD serotype (SAT3), identified through
FAO’s extensive field assessments and
investigations. The new strand of FMD spreads
more quickly and can wipe out entire herds with
overt disease, reinforcing the importance of
livestock disease control throughout South
Sudan. This year, outbreaks of FMD have been
reported by FAO and the Ministry of Livestock
and Fisheries Industry in Eastern Equatoria and
Lakes States. Although not practiced in South
Sudan, controlling FMD requires identifying the
strand, conducting regular vaccinations and
treatment with antibiotics – an enormous task in
a context where veterinary services were
extremely limited before the current crisis.
Further outbreaks are anticipated later in 2015 in
conflict affected areas, where livestock

2

trade at border areas. A regional initiative
launched by FAO mid-2015 has helped to
establish joint efforts to control the spread of
cross-border diseases between South Sudan and
Uganda using a regional approach to combine
efforts to control livestock trade. FAO trained 30
people on risk-analysis and transboundary
animal disease control, from all livestock check
points, including the Nimule and Uganda border
and Juba International Airport.
In many areas of South Sudan, livestock
populations are decreasing significantly, as
reported by pastoralist groups in Upper Nile
State. This is exacerbated by a continued
inability of veterinary services to access
livestock in hot-spot areas, combined with the

lack of cold chain facilities for vaccine storage
and delivery. These factors are placing an
untenable strain on the livestock population.

RISING SOCIAL TENSIONS
The annual movement of South Sudan’s
estimated 12 million cattle, in search of grazing
areas and water resources, has always stirred
controversy.
Inevitably
with
seasonal
transhumance patterns, migrant pastoralist
groups come into violent clashes with each other
and with settled farming communities. Since the
onset of the conflict in 2013 and linked
proliferation of small arms, cattle raids and
clashes have rapidly intensified with a rising
death toll.
Pastoralists fleeing areas of insecurity have
sought refuge in areas perceived to be less
volatile, but the impact of this massive
displacement of cattle and people has
undermined the stability of areas less affected by
the wider political conflict. Although mirrored in
other parts of the country, this is most
pronounced in the eastern counties of Western
Equatoria State. In 2014, large numbers of
cattle keeping communities from Jonglei and
Lakes States migrated into the area.
Traditionally, this movement occurs during the
dry season and the cattle -keepers then return to
their areas of origin. However, the conflict has
forced many livestock owners to extend their
normally temporary stay and moved deeper into
Western Equatoria State. Tensions between
pastoralists groups and farmers have boiled over,
leading to a Presidential Decree ordering all
cattle keepers to leave the Greater Equatoria
region and return to Jonglei and Lakes States by
8 May 2015. Despite the expulsion orders, civil
unrest between communities continues to
escalate.
In Mundri West County, widespread clashes
from 22 May resulted in a large number of
civilian fatalities, according to a report by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
Additionally, recent clashes have reportedly led
to the displacement of at least 25 000 civilians
around Ibba, Maridi, Mundri East, Mundri West

3

and Yambio counties in Western Equatoria
State.
Inter-communal conflicts rooted in tribal and
ethnic associations are on the rise due to changes
in local power structures and the existence of
factional militia in some areas. In competition
for pasture, elevated levels of inter-communal
tensions took place in Lakes and Warrap States
and the Equatoria region since January 2015. A
deadly cycle of revenge killings spiraled through
May and June in Lakes State, leaving many
dead, or displaced and destroying farmland. As
large numbers of pastoralists continue to move
into other territories, levels of mistrust and
violence continue to grow with irreversible
consequences.

FOOD INSECURITY
The livestock crisis is contributing to deepening
food insecurity in South Sudan, which has
reached alarming rates in 2015. Devaluation of
the local currency, soaring food prices and
reduced food trade as a result of the conflict, are
undermining the food security of cattle keeping
communities.
The current economic difficulties and disrupted
livestock markets and trade routes have resulted
in fluctuating prices for selling or exchanging
cattle throughout the year. Livestock markets
have been disrupted and are sparse. Before the
crisis, selling cattle was traditionally reserved
for dowries or paying off debts. Due to the
worsening food security situation since the
crisis, pastoralist communities have engaged in
selling and slaughtering their livestock as a
primary coping mechanism. South Sudan is
wealthy in livestock, with the highest per capita
ownership of animals on the continent, but relies
on imports of livestock products from
neighbouring countries. Since January 2015, the
number of livestock imports from Uganda has
decreased owing to economic issues and lower
dollar exchange rates in the markets.

Milk is the main source of
nutrition for families and
children in cattle camp
communities. The spread of
diseases
reduces
milk
production in cattle. Since
December
2013,
many
pastoralists have depleted or
lost their livestock assets due
to the conflict. This greatly
threatens their food security
and it can take several years
for a family to replace an
animal able to produce milk if
it dies of disease or has to be
sold.

MIGRATION UPDATE
In 2014, FAO raised concerns
about abnormal migration
patterns
attributed
to
insecurity, search for pasture
and seasonal factors such as
flooding and drought. The impact of massive
abnormal livestock movements has resulted in
extreme cases of cattle raiding, destruction of
crops and deadly clashes over access to pasture
and water. For example, pastoralists from
Jonglei State, who traditionally migrate to Upper
Nile State changed their route and headed
towards Ethiopia to avoid insecure areas.
Additionally, the movement of populations of
cattle from Jonglei State into Western Equatoria
through Mundri West and across Mundri East
counties caused an enormous threat to the host

4

community, forcing them to move their cattle
deep into villages in anticipation of raids.
Many traditional migrations took place in 2015,
including the peaceful migration of livestock
from Sudan through South Sudan. However,
abnormal migration patterns will continue until
security improves and pastoralists can return to
their places of origin or move through traditional
routes. With livestock populations and
pastoralists scattered by insecurity, the
challenges of reaching these herds for
vaccination and treatment multiply.

WHAT IS FAO DOING?
FAO livestock teams remain on the front lines of
the livestock crisis. Throughout 2015, direct
interventions by FAO have been critical in
keeping animals alive and productive as many
partners fled highly insecure areas and access
constraints persisted. To-date, FAO has reached
over 3 million animals through a combination of
vaccinations and treatment. Working closely
with the Ministry of Livestock- at national and
state levels, joint livestock teams continue to
deploy across the country to investigate disease
outbreaks, conduct disease surveillance and lead
interventions in areas where no partners are
operating. At the county level, FAO has trained
more than 120 disease-reporting focal points.
This year, South Sudan’s disease reporting has
improved as the country became a member of
the World Organization for Animal Health
(OIE) and submitted reports for the first time.
FAO works side by side with community based
animal health workers, who provide basic
veterinary services to pastoralists. In 2015, FAO
distributed emergency livestock treatment kits
(with veterinary drugs), complemented by
training for community animal health workers.
Since January 2015, FAO has trained over
600 community animal health workers, offering
refresher courses and new trainings. FAO
continues to develop the self-reliance and
sustainability of the community animal health
workers system, and relies on their skills to
reach animals most in need.
FAO is now scaling up ongoing efforts to
strengthen the cold chain system for livestock
vaccines. The central cold chain for the country
in Juba has tripled in storage capacity since
2013. FAO has strengthened the cold chain hubs
in Wau, Rumbek and Torit and has reached
15 locations in seven states with equipment,
installations, repairs and maintenance. By
advancing technologies and replacing kerosene
refrigerators with solar-powered refrigerators,
cold chain systems and facilities can operate
through times of crisis and during fuel shortages.
Over USD 1 million of cold chain equipment
has been procured by FAO this year alone. In

5

July, ministry cold chain technicians and
partners were trained on vaccine and cold chain
management.
The situation remains of great concern,
threatening the health and productivity of the
national herd and tearing at the social, political
and economic fabric of South Sudan. FAO will
continue to scale up livestock interventions
through 2016–2017 and requires immediate
funding of USD 600 000 to increase the
supply of livestock vaccines and medicines
and continue the vaccination campaign
through 2015.

