GIEWS Country Brief
South Sudan
Reference Date: 21-February-2017
FOOD SECURITY SNAPSHOT
 Famine declared in parts of former Unity State
 About 5 million people estimated to be severely food
insecure until July 2017
 Crop production declines due to insecurity and
displacement of farmers
 Food prices at exceptionally high levels

Famine declared in parts of former Unity State
According to the latest IPC analysis, localized famine conditions
are currently reported in former Unity State, with a caseload of
about 100 000 people in IPC category 5 (“Catastrophe”) in former
Leer and Mayendit counties. In addition, always in former Unity
State, there is an elevated risk that famine is occurring also in
former Koch County, but it cannot be confirmed due to limited
available evidence, while in former Panyijiar County famine has
been avoided so far only thanks to adequate humanitarian
assistance.
Nationwide, food insecurity has escalated during the last three
years due to conflict, violence, macro-economic collapse and
exhaustion of households’ copying mechanisms. Between
February and April 2017, about 4.9 million people, over
40 percent of total population, are estimated to be severely food
insecure and this figure is projected to reach 5.5 million people at
the peak of the lean season in July. Although most food insecure
people are concentrated in the Greater Upper Nile region, food
security has drastically deteriorated in former Northern Bahr el
Ghazal State and the Greater Equatoria Region.
Since the start of the conflict in mid-December 2013, according to
OCHA and UNHCR, over 3 million people were forced to flee
their homes due to insecurity, including about 1.85 million IDPs,
with about 195 000 people in UNMISS Protection of
Civilians (PoC) sites across the country, and 1.2 million people
that fled into neighbouring countries (Uganda, the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia and Kenya).

Below-average crop production estimated in
2016 due to insecurity and displacements
Harvesting of the 2016 main season crops was completed in
January. According to the preliminary results of the FAO/WFP
Crop and Food Security Assessment Mission (CFSAM), the
overall production (including first season crops harvested last
July/August) for 2016 is estimated at below-average level of

GIEWS global information and early warning system on food and agriculture

826 000 tonnes, about 10 percent below the previous year’s
output. Despite favourable rains across the country (except in
Greater Kapoeta region in the east), crop production has been
severely affected by increasing displacements and insecurity
(following the renewed conflict in July) that hampered cultivation
activities, including harvesting. In particular, area planted with
second season crops in the “green belt” has been well-below
average, with most households being able to cultivate only small
plots near homesteads, mainly with vegetables.
Land preparation for planting first season crops is about to start
in southern bi-modal rainfall areas. According to the latest
weather forecast by the Greater Horn of Africa Consensus
Forum (GHACOF), the March-to-May rainy season is expected to
be drier than usual in south-eastern areas of the country,
including former Eastern Equatoria State and the southern part of
former Jonglei State, while above-average rainfall amounts are
expected in the “green belt”, including former Central and
Western Equatoria states.

Prices of cereals at exceptionally high levels
In the capital, Juba, prices of sorghum and maize peaked in
December 2016 and subsequently declined in January 2017 by
6 and 10 percent, respectively, partly as a result of the harvesting
of the 2016 second season crops in southern bi-modal rainfall
areas. In February, prices resumed their increasing trend, surging
by about 30 percent and reaching new record highs. Prices of
cassava and groundnuts followed similar patterns, increasing by
15 and 30 percent in February, while prices of wheat, after having
peaked in August 2016, declined by 30 percent between
August 2016 and February 2017. Overall, in February, staple
food prices in Juba were between 2 and more than 4 times their
levels in February last year, due to insecurity, a tight supply
situation, hyperinflation and a significant depreciation of the local
currency.
In markets located in central and northern uni-modal rainfall
areas, prices of sorghum, after having peaked in July/August,
declined on average by about 40 percent between July/August
and November 2016 as newly harvested crops increased
supplies. Subsequently, prices resumed their upward trend,
increasing by about 20 percent between November 2016 and
January 2017, when they were between 3 and 10 times higher
than 12 months earlier.

GIEWS global information and early warning system on food and agriculture

