SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook Update

December 2017

Some households likely in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5), while conflict has increased in several areas
FEWS NET produces forward-looking food security analysis and IPC compatible mapping several times a year for 30 countries, including South
Sudan. FEWS NET is a member of South Sudan’s multi-stakeholder IPC Technical Working Group and an active participant in national IPC
analysis workshops in South Sudan. The map and classifications in this report use IPC standards and methods, but do not necessarily reflect a
consensus view of the national IPC Technical Working Group, IPC partners, or the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. However, this
report was reviewed by the South Sudan IPC Technical Working Group prior to publication. The most recent national IPC analysis was
conducted in September 2017 and the next analysis is expected to convene in January 2018.

KEY MESSAGES
• According to key informant information and rapid
assessments, the harvest has supported marginal food
security improvements including in some counties where
Phase 5 populations were likely during the 2017 lean season.
However, many households still face large food consumption
gaps and some households likely remain in Catastrophe (IPC
Phase 5) in Wau, Leer, Nyirol, and Ayod.
• According
to
key
informant
observations
from
November/December assessments in Greater Baggari, it is
unlikely Famine (IPC Phase 5) is ongoing among populations
in Mboro, Farajallah, Ngo Ndakall, Ngissa, and Ngoku, though
data limitations remain and the results of food security
indicators collected during the November assessment are not
yet available. Given extreme levels of acute malnutrition
observed during the lean season, it is possible Famine (IPC
Phase 5) occurred in this area during the 2017 lean season,
but evidence is insufficient to confirm or deny.
• The prevalence of acute malnutrition remains ‘Critical’ in
several areas of the country even during the post-harvest
period. Many households are expected to deplete their
minimal harvests by early 2018, and food security and
nutrition outcomes are expected to further deteriorate
through mid 2018. Widespread Crisis (IPC Phase 3) and
Emergency (IPC Phase 4) are expected, and there remains a
credible risk that Famine (IPC Phase 5) could occur in a worstcase scenario of an extended absence of assistance and
continued conflict that limits household movement.
• There has been a notable increase in conflict in Jonglei,
central Unity, and Lakes between October and December. In
addition to the loss of life, the violence has caused
displacement, restricted households’ movement towards
fields, and forced aid workers to relocate, all of which are
contributing to continued extreme acute food insecurity. It is
highly unlikely food security will improve until there is a
resolution to the conflict, and urgent action to facilitate such
is needed.
FEWS NET South Sudan
southsudan@fews.net
www.fews.net

Current food security outcomes, December 2017 to
January 2018

Source: FEWS NET

Projected food security outcomes, February 2018 to
May 2018

Source: FEWS NET
FEWS NET classification is IPC-compatible. IPC-compatible analysis
follows key IPC protocols but does not necessarily reflect the
consensus of national food security partners.

FEWS NET is a USAID-funded activity. The content of this report does not necessarily reflect
the view of the United States Agency for International Development or the United States
Government

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook Update

CURRENT SITUATION
Between October and December, the number of conflict
events and resulting fatalities has increased in several areas
of the country compared to mid-2017 (Figure 1). Intercommunal clashes in Rumbek Centre, Rumbek North,
Rumbek East, and Cueibet of Lakes have disrupted normal
livelihoods, limited the delivery of health and nutrition
services, forced several aid agencies to relocated, and
prompted the Government to declare a three-month state of
emergency. In Duk Payuel of Jonglei, relief supplies have
been looted, crops have been destroyed, and many lives
have been lost, including those of aid workers. Attacks
reported in Duk Padiet of Duk and Daktek of Pochalla have
had similar impacts. Continued insecurity in parts of Nyirol
and armed clashes in Ayod have also restricted households’
access to fields and prevented normal markets functioning.
In Leer and Mayendit of Unity, armed clashes between
Government and opposition forces have forced many aid
workers to relocate, disrupting the delivery of assistance.
Conversely, emergency humanitarian assistance has reached
Morobo of Central Equatoria for the first time since July
2016. Furthermore, the flow of staple commodities from
Uganda to Morobo is increasing, and markets functioning is
improving.

December 2017
Figure 1. Conflict events in Jonglei, Unity, and Lakes
States, Oct.–Nov. 2017 compared to Aug.–Sept. 2017

Source: ACLED data

Figure 2. Results from SMART surveys conducted in South
Sudan, Oct.-Dec. 2017 compared to Oct.-Dec 2016
Location

Oct. to Dec. 2016
GAM (WHZ)
(95% C.I.)

Non-trauma
CDR

Oct. to Dec. 2017
GAM (WHZ)
(95% C.I.)

*Cause of death
not specified

Mayendit,
Unity

N/A

N/A

Nontrauma
CDR
*Cause of death
not specified

19.9%

(14.1-22.4)

0.82

In Greater Baggari of Wau, key informant observations
Pibor,
26.4%
0.16*
26.8%
0.83
Jonglei
during multi-agency rapid assessments in November and
(21.6-31.8)
(22.8-31.2)
December indicate it is unlikely a Famine (IPC Phase 5) is
Kapoeta
14.0%
0.78
24.0%
1.23
East,
(n/a)
(19.0-29.8)
ongoing in Mboro, Farajallah, Ngo Ndakall, Ngissa, and
EES
Ngoku, though data limitations exist. Rapid MUAC screenings
Ikotos,
N/A
N/A
10.3%
1.32
EES
in November of 2,500 under-five children found a proxy
(7.9-13.3)
Canal Pigi
N/A
N/A
10.3%
0.17
GAM (MUAC) of 28.1 percent (C.I. N/A) in Mboro and 10
Jonglei
(7.6-13.9)
percent (C.I. N/A) in Farajallah. In Farajallah, the GAM
Lopa Lafon
17.3%
1.57
9.7%
0.57
(MUAC) prevalence declined from September, when a rapid
EES
(14.1-21.1)
(6.8-13.7)
screening reported a GAM (MUAC) prevalence of 25.8
Jur River
N/A
N/A
10.1%
0.34
WBeG
percent. In Mboro, the prevalence is slightly lower than the
7.2-13.9
Raga
34.7 percent reported in September, though the prevalence
N/A
N/A
7.3%
1.11
WBeG
(5.3-10.1)
remains extremely high. In December, an assessment was
Akobo East
16.7%
N/A
14.2%
0.41
conducted in Ngo Ndakalla, Ngissa, Ngoku, Mboro, and
Jonglei
13.0-21.2
(11.7-17.1)
Farajallah and found a proxy GAM (MUAC) of 18.3 percent. It
Source: Data from South Sudan Nutrition Information Working Group; Surveys
is expected slight improvements in nutrition have occurred
conducted by UNIDO (Mayendit), IMC (Kapoeta East 2016), ACF (Kapoeta East 2017)
due to nutrition interventions in August and September,
JAM (Pibor), AVSI (Ikotos), Nile Hope (kanal Pig), SCI (Lopa Lafon), JIA (Jur river and
Raga), IMC (Akobo East))
emergency food assistance, and some harvests. However, it
should be noted that none of the above surveys are representative. Results from food security indicators collected during
the assessment are not yet available, but given extreme levels of acute malnutrition observed during the lean season, it is
possible a Famine (IPC Phase 5) occurred in this area during the 2017 lean season.
Throughout South Sudan, food security has improved marginally with the harvest, including in some counties where
Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) populations were likely during the peak of the 2017 lean season: In Kapoeta East of Eastern
Equatoria, Rumbek North and Yirol West of Lakes, and Tonj North and Tonj South of Warrap, key informant information
indicates the ongoing harvest and access to fish and livestock products have contributed to slight improvements in food
security and even worst-off households have some access to these improvements. However, throughout the country many
households did not cultivate, or they harvested minimal amounts of cereal. Nearly half of the population remains in Crisis
(IPC Phase 3) or worse due to this and severely limited livelihood options to access other sources of food. Catastrophe (IPC

Famine Early Warning Systems Network
2

SOUTH SUDAN Food Security Outlook Update

December 2017

Phase 5) likely persists in parts of Leer, Wau, Nyirol, and Ayod, where many of the worst-off households likely do not have
access to harvests and ongoing insecurity is also limiting the delivery of assistance and access to natural sources of food.
Emergency humanitarian assistance continues to be delivered to around 2.5 million people a month and this assistance is
preventing more extreme outcomes in many areas, although the reach of assistance is under 50 percent of the estimated
population in need. Despite emergency assistance and the ongoing harvest, results from recent SMART surveys indicate
persistent high levels of acute malnutrition and excess mortality (Figure 2).

UPDATED ASSUMPTIONS
The assumptions used to develop FEWS NET’s most likely scenario for the South Sudan Food Security Outlook for October
2017 to May 2018 remain unchanged except for the following:
•

In addition to the ongoing political conflict, inter-communal clashes are likely to persist in parts of Lakes and Jonglei
during the outlook period. Conflict in Warrap is also likely due to high tension in Gogrial West and Gogrial East and the
proximity of these counties to ongoing conflict in Lakes.

•

Based on key informant information and recent field assessments, seasonal improvements in Yirol East, Yirol West,
Renk, Ezo, Mvolo, and Nagero are better than previously assumed. In Yirol West and Yirol East, it was previously
assumed that intercommunal conflict would continue restricting households’ access to fields and fishing; however,
relative calm has persisted and allowed households to engage in these livelihood activities. In Renk, Mvolo, Ezo, and
Nagera, the level of production among populations of concern is slightly better than previously assumed. As a result,
relatively greater food access from these sources is expected through January 2018.

•

It was previously assumed that humanitarian assistance would continue to prevent more extreme area-level outcomes
in Duk and Guit. However, recent conflict has led to the looting of assistance and disrupted deliveries, and it is now
expected that conflict will continue to disrupt the delivery of planned assistance in these counties.

•

In early December, aid agencies were again granted access to Greater Baggari and it is expected they will have
relatively better access to this area in the near term. However, given the volatile nature of the conflict, assistance
cannot be assumed throughout the outlook period.

PROJECTED OUTLOOK THROUGH MAY 2018
Crisis (IPC Phase 3) or Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes are expected to continue in many counties even during the
remainder of the harvesting period through January 2018. Due to the above mentioned disruptions to humanitarian
assistance deliveries in Duk and Guit, Emergency (IPC Phase 4) outcomes are most likely in these counties in December and
January. Conversely, slightly better food security outcomes are now expected in Yirol East and Yirol West of Lakes, Renk of
Upper Nile, and Ezo, Mvolo, and Nagero of Western Equatoria, where key informant information indicates that access to
harvests and fishing is slightly better than previously projected. Access to these food sources is expected to improve food
security to Stressed (IPC Phase 2) in December and January, though these improvements are expected to be short-lived.
As previously projected, it is still expected that most households will deplete their minimal harvests in early 2018. Prices are
expected to start rising around January/February and persist at extremely high levels, above those observed in 2017. As a
result, many households will face record low purchasing capacity. High levels of GAM and excess mortality already persist
during the harvest, and given the expectation of continued very lower purchasing power and conflict-related restrictions to
normal livelihood activities, many households are expected to face extreme acute food insecurity. Although emergency
humanitarian assistance is likely to reach 2.5-3 million people a month throughout 2018 and will prevent more extreme
outcomes in many areas, assistance at these levels will only reach an estimated 50 percent of the need. Concern is highest
for the many households in need who do not have access to assistance. It is expected some households will exhaust the
capacity to cope during the outlook period and be in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) in areas of greatest concern, including
Greater Baggari of Wau, Leer of Unity, and Ayod and Nyirol of Jonglei. However, Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) remains possible
in many other areas, specifically in the event that conflict restricts household movement in search of alternative food
sources. In a worst-case scenario characterized by an extended absence of humanitarian assistance, Famine (IPC Phase 5) is
likely in several areas of the country.

ABOUT THIS UPDATE

This monthly report covers current conditions as well as changes to the projected outlook for food insecurity in this country. It updates
FEWS NET’s Food Security Outlook, which is published three times per year. Learn more about our work here.

Famine Early Warning Systems Network
3

