South Sudan: The 2015 Rainfall Seasonal Analysis

November 2015

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

HIGHLIGHTS
• The growing season of 2015 in South Sudan started well due to early favourable rainfall, with earlier than
average and timely crop planting across most of Western Equatoria, Greater Bahr-el-Ghazal, northern areas
of the country, primarily in Upper Nile.
• Since the beginning of the season, the rainfall was moderately above average in middle-western, far southeastern and northern parts of the country and moderately below average in south-eastern regions. The
continued favourable rains in parts of the country has had a positive impact on second season crops of the
bio-modal rainfall areas of western and southern parts of South Sudan.
• In October, favorably above average rainfall performance was observed across the country except southern
Jonglei and Central Unity. In pastoralists areas, the favorable rainfall is expected to improve the water and
pasture condition for the livestock.
• The on-going El Nino event, officially declared in March, will remain active throughout 2015 and is very
likely to extend into the first quarter of 2016. Thus, the recent above average rainfall observed in Central
and Eastern Equatoria states is attributed to impact of the current El Niño event.
• The Prospects of the second agriculture season in the Greater Equatoria are moderate to good. So far, the
season is developing normally in some areas but continued monitoring is required.

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

Seasonal Rainfall Performance
Seasonal rainfall performance
Up to end of October, seasonal rainfall was
moderately above average in middlewestern, far south-eastern and northern
parts of the country (Wau in Western Bahr
el Ghazal, Kapoeta East in Eastern
Equatoria, as well as Upper Nile state) and
moderately below average in south-eastern
regions (south and east of Jonglei and areas
Eastern Equatoria States). The continued
favourable rain are expected to have
positive impact on the second season crops
of the dual cropping areas of western and
southern of South Sudan. This is in line with
field reports information.
Map 1: Seasonal cumulative rainfall until end of October 2015, as a percentage of the 20-year average.
Hashed pattern indicates main agricultural areas. Brown shades indicate below-average rainfall; blue
shades indicate above-average seasonal rainfall.

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

Seasonal Rainfall Performance

Map 2: 30 days cumulative rainfall until 31 of October 2015, as a percentage of the 20-year average.
Hashed pattern indicates main agricultural areas. Brown shades indicate below-average rainfall; blue
shades indicate above-average seasonal rainfall.

In addition, a closer look at the more recent
rainfall performance during the month of
October reveals widespread above average
rainfall (see Map 2) across the country except
for southern Jonglei. This corroborates field
reports of increased rainfall pattern in Central,
Western and Eastern Equatoria (Magwi, Budi,
Western parts of Ikwoto). In line with above
analysis, field report indicate that in Central
and Western Equatoria (Greenbelt counties,
mainly Yambio, Nzara, Ezo, Ibba, and Tambura)
are actively involved in green harvest of
second season short term crops (maize and
groundnut). In pastoralists areas, the favorable
rainfall are expected to improve the water
and pasture condition for the livestock, after a
fairly dry mid season.
This recovery in rainfall is important
considering the pronouncedly drier than
average middle season rainfall (July to
September), though some areas (southern
Jonglei and NW East Equatoria) remain in
overall seasonal deficit.

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

Onset of Season and Vegetation Status

Left: Date of onset of the growing season compared to average. Pinks and yellows to reds for delayed growing seasons, green shades for earlier than average growing seasons.
Right: Late October 2015 Vegetation Index as a percentage of the 12-year average. Hashed pattern indicates main agricultural areas. Orange shades for below-average; green shades for above-average vegetation.

Onset of Season and Vegetation Status
The growing season started earlier than usual in western areas (Western Equatoria and Greater Bahr-el-Ghazal) as well as along
the border with Sudan and in Upper Nile state, due to good rains during the earlier stages of the season. In central and eastern
areas (Central Equatoria, parts of Jonglei), the season started moderately later than usual due to drier than average conditions in
April. Overall, no significant perturbations of the planting dates are noticeable in this season.
Although October rainfall was above average, improvements in vegetation are not immediately reflected. Hence, below average
vegetation patterns seen mainly in Jonglei and Eastern Equatoria (and Central Equatoria to a lesser degree) are still in place but
show a tendency to return to average levels. Field reports indicate an improvement in the conditions of the second crop mainly in
Eastern Equatoria and Central Equatoria as a result of the October rainfall. In Warrap, the main harvest is completed and
production is anticipated to be better than last year in some areas, as by and large it avoided the mid season dryness. In Western
Equatoria, the green harvest of maize and groundnuts (second season crop) is underway. In addition, Central Equatoria report the
availability of second season green harvests in most markets around the state (groundnut, maize and vegetables).

SOUTH SUDAN SEASONAL ANALYSIS - 2015

El Nino Event and Seasonal Rainfall Forecast
The El Nino Event of 2015-2016

Rainfall forecasts for December 2015 –February 2016

An El Nino event is officially active since March 2015. After
remaining at relatively weak levels until May 2015, it is now
approaching its peak in December 2015 and start
disappearing after the first quarter of 2016.

Forecasts from ECMWF (December 2015 to February 2016) indicate normal
to above normal rainfall for South Sudan.

Historically, El Nino events impact South Sudan, leading to
growing season rainfall deficits during the July-September
period mostly in more South-East areas. These same areas
may benefit from enhanced rainfall now (OctoberDecember) as a result of the spread of the typical El Nino
enhanced rainfall in East Africa.

In practice, there will only be significant rainfall in Eastern Equatoria,
specially in border areas with Kenya and Uganda as a result of the El Nino
enhanced rainfall in East Africa. This will benefit late planted and second
crop development in these regions.

So far this season has conformed to this general patterns
quite well.

Probability of an El Nino event (red bars) vs neutral conditions (green) and La Nina (blue).
El Nino probabilities remain above 90% throughout the rest of the growing season.

ECMWF forecast for December 2015-February 2016 rainfall.
Green shades = wetter than average conditions more likely. Brown shades = drier than average conditions more likely

Data Sources:
Rainfall: CHIRPS, Climate Hazards Group, UCSB
Vegetation: MODIS NDVI, EOSDIS-NASA
Land Cover: FAO GLC-Share

Processing:
VAM software components, ArcGIS

For more information, please contact:
Raul Cumba (VAM South Sudan) - raul.cumba@wfp.org
Rogerio Bonifacio (VAM HQ) - rogerio.bonifacio@wfp.org

+211 920002729
+39 06 6513 3917

