An Introduction to the Basic Concepts of Food Security
Practical Guides

Food Security Information for Action

I. THE FOUR DIMENSIONS OF FOOD SECURITY
Food security exists when all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient safe and
nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life.
- 1996 World Food Summit

From this definition, four main dimensions of food security can be identified:
Physical AVAILABILITY
of food

Food availability addresses the “supply side” of food security and is determined by the level of
food production, stock levels and net trade.

Economic and physical
ACCESS to food

An adequate supply of food at the national or international level does not in itself guarantee
household level food security. Concerns about insufficient food access have resulted in a greater
policy focus on incomes, expenditure, markets and prices in achieving food security objectives.

Food UTILIZATION

Utilization is commonly understood as the way the body makes the most of various nutrients
in the food. Sufficient energy and nutrient intake by individuals is the result of good care and
feeding practices, food preparation, diversity of the diet and intra-household distribution of food.
Combined with good biological utilization of food consumed, this determines the nutritional status
of individuals.

STABILITY of the other
three dimensions over
time

Even if your food intake is adequate today, you are still considered to be food insecure if you have
inadequate access to food on a periodic basis, risking a deterioration of your nutritional status.
Adverse weather conditions, political instability, or economic factors (unemployment, rising food
prices) may have an impact on your food security status.

For food security objectives to be realized, all four dimensions must be fulfilled simultaneously.
II. THE DURATION OF FOOD INSECURITY
Food security analysts have defined two general types of food insecurity:

CHRONIC FOOD INSECURITY

TRANSITORY FOOD INSECURITY

is...

long-term or persistent.

short-term and temporary.

occurs
when...

people are unable to meet their minimum food
requirements over a sustained period of time.

there is a sudden drop in the ability to produce or
access enough food to maintain a good nutritional
status.

results
from...

extended periods of poverty, lack of assets and
inadequate access to productive or financial
resources.

short-term shocks and fluctuations in food availability
and food access, including year-to-year variations in
domestic food production, food prices and household
incomes.

can be
overcome
with...

typical long term development measures also used
to address poverty, such as education or access to
productive resources, such as credit. They may also
need more direct access to food to enable them to
raise their productive capacity.

transitory food insecurity is relatively unpredictable
and can emerge suddenly. This makes planning and
programming more difficult and requires different
capacities and types of intervention, including early
warning capacity and safety net programmes ( see
Box 1).

The concept of seasonal food security falls between chronic and transitory food insecurity. It is similar to chronic
food insecurity as it is usually predictable and follows a sequence of known events. However, as seasonal food
insecurity is of limited duration it can also be seen as recurrent, transitory food insecurity. It occurs when there is
a cyclical pattern of inadequate availability and access to food. This is associated with seasonal fluctuations in the
climate, cropping patterns, work opportunities (labour demand) and disease.
The EC - FAO Food Security Programme is funded by the European Union and implemented by FAO

1

An Introduction to the Basic Concepts of Food Security

Practical Guides

Food Security Information for Action

Box 1. What are Safety Nets?
Measures to enhance direct access to food are more
likely to be beneficial if these are embedded in more
general social safety net programmes. Safety nets
include income transfers for those chronically unable
to work—because of age or handicaps—and for those
temporarily affected by natural disasters or economic
recession.

The severity of undernourishment indicates, for the
food deprived, the extent to which dietary energy
consumption falls below the pre-determined threshold.
The Integrated Food Security Phase Classification
(IPC)
The IPC is a classification system for food security
crises based on a range of livelihood needs:

Options include:

IPC Phase Classification

Indicators

• Targeted direct feeding programmes. These include
school meals; feeding of expectant and nursing mothers
as well as children under five through primary health
centres, soup kitchens and special canteens.

Generally food secure

• Food-for-work programmes. Food-for-work programmes
provide support to households while developing useful
infrastructure such as small-scale irrigation, rural roads,
buildings for rural health centres and schools.

Humanitarian emergency

- Crude Mortality Rate
- Malnutrition prevalence
- Food Access/ Availability
- Dietary Diversity
- Water Access/Availability
- Coping strategies
- Livelihood Assets

Chronically food insecure
Acute food and livelihood
crisis

Famine / humanitarian
catastrophe

See www.ipcinfo.org for more information

• Income-transfer programmes. These can be in cash
or in kind, including food stamps, subsidized rations and
other targeted measures for poor households.
Stamoulis, K. and Zezza, A. 2003. A Conceptual Framework for
National Agricultural, Rural Development, and Food Security Strategies
and Policies. ESA Working Paper No. 03-17, November 2003.
Agricultural and Development Economics Division, FAO, Rome. www.
fao.org/documents/show_cdr.asp?url_file=/docrep/007/ae050e/
ae050e00.htm

III. THE SEVERITY OF FOOD INSECURITY
When analyzing food insecurity, it is not enough to
know the duration of the problem that people are
experiencing, but also how intense or severe the impact
of the identified problem is on the overall food security
and nutrition status. This knowledge will influence the
nature, extent and urgency of the assistance needed by
affected population groups.
Different ‘scales’ or ‘phases’ to ‘grade’ or ‘classify’
food security have been developed by food security
analysts using different indicators and cut-off points or
‘benchmarks’. Examples include:

IV. VULNERABILITY
The dynamic nature of food security is implicit when we
talk about people who are vulnerable to experiencing
food insecurity in the future. Vulnerability is defined in
terms of the following three critical dimensions:
1. vulnerability to an outcome;
2. from a variety of risk factors;
3. because of an inability to manage those risks.
Indeed, a person can be vulnerable to hunger even if
he or she is not actually hungry at a given point in time.
Vulnerability analysis suggests two main intervention
options:
1. Reduce the degree of exposure to the hazard;
2. Increase the ability to cope.
By accounting for vulnerability, food security policies and
programs broaden their efforts from addressing current
constraints to food consumption, to include actions that
also address future threats to food security.

Measuring the Severity of Undernourishment
The measure for hunger compiled by FAO, defined as
undernourishment, refers to the proportion of the
population whose dietary energy consumption is less
than a pre-determined threshold. This threshold is
country specific and is measured in terms of the number
of kilocalories required to conduct sedentary or light
activities. The undernourished are also referred to as
suffering from food deprivation.

Box 2. Analyzing the Risk of Becoming Food
Insecure
For example, we may be interested in analyzing the risk
of becoming food insecure as a result of a flood.
If a household lives outside a flood plain then the
exposure to flooding is low and therefore the risk of a
flood causing the household to become food insecure is

2

An Introduction to the Basic Concepts of Food Security

Practical Guides

Food Security Information for Action

low (unless their crops are in the valley!).
However, if they live on the flood plain, but they have the
ability to cope with the hazard, for example by being very
mobile, and being able to move their animals and/or food
crops to safety, then the risk may still be low.

V. HUNGER, MALNUTRITION AND POVERTY
It is important to understand how these three concepts
are related to food insecurity.
Hunger is usually understood as an uncomfortable or

painful sensation caused by insufficient food energy
consumption. Scientifically, hunger is referred to as
food deprivation.

deprivation that relate to human capabilities including
consumption and food security, health, education,
rights, voice, security, dignity and decent work.”
- Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)

It is argued that a strategy for attacking poverty in
conjunction with policies to ensure food security offers
the best hope of swiftly reducing mass poverty and
hunger. However, recent studies show that economic
growth alone will not take care of the problem of food
security. What is needed is a combination of:
- income growth; supported by
- direct nutrition interventions; and
- investment in health, water and education.
FIND OUT MORE:

Simply put, all hungry people are food insecure, but not
all food insecure people are hungry, as there are other
causes of food insecurity, including those due to poor
intake of micro-nutrients.

E-learning

Malnutrition results from deficiencies, excesses or

Further Reading

imbalances in the consumption of macro- and/or micronutrients. Malnutrition may be an outcome of food
insecurity, or it may relate to non-food factors, such as:
- inadequate care practices for children,
- insufficient health services; and
- an unhealthy environment.
While poverty is undoubtedly a cause of hunger, lack
of adequate and proper nutrition itself is an underlying
cause of poverty.
A current and widely used definition of poverty is:
“Poverty encompasses different

dimensions of

Figure 1: Food insecurity, malnutrition and poverty are
deeply interrelated phenomena
Poverty

These guidelines are taken from the e-learning course “Food
Security Concepts and Frameworks” available at:
www.foodsec.org/dl

Devereux, S. 2006 Distinguishing between chronic and
transitory food insecurity in emergency needs assessments.
SENAC. WFP. Rome.
Dilley M. and Boudreau T.E. Coming to terms with
vulnerability: a critique of the food security definition. Food
Policy, Volume 26, Number 3, June 2001 , pp. 229-247(19)
FAO. 2003. Focus on Food Insecurity and Vulnerability – A
review of the UN System Common Country Assessments
and World Bank Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers. FIVIMS
Secretariat and Wageningen University and Research Centre:
www.fao.org/DOCREP/006/Y5095E/Y5095E00.htm
Sen, A.K. 1981. Poverty and Famines: An Essay on
Entitlements and Deprivation. Oxford. Clarendon Press.
Stamoulis, K. and Zezza, A. 2003. A Conceptual Framework
for National Agricultural, Rural Development, and Food Security
Strategies and Policies. ESA Working Paper No. 03-17,
November 2003. Agricultural and Development Economics
Division, FAO, Rome. www.fao.org/documents/show_cdr.
asp?url_file=/docrep/007/ae050e/ae050e00.htm
WFP.2005. Emergency Food Security Assessment Handbook.
http://www.wfp.org/operations/emergency_needs/EFSA_
section1.pdf

Low productivity

Food insecurity, hunger and
malnutrition

This document is available online at:
www.foodsec.org/docs/concepts_guide.pdf
For more resources see:
http://www.foodsec.org/pubs.htm

Poor physical and cognitive
development

© FAO 2008
Published by the EC - FAO Food Security Programme
website: www.foodsec.org
e-mail: information-for-action@fao.org

3

