Emergency Operation (EMOP) Republic of South Sudan (No.200859)
Title: Emergency Operation in Response to Conflict in South
Sudan
Number of beneficiaries

1,653,384

Duration of project
(starting date – end date)

1 October 2015 – 30 September
2016

Gender Marker Code *

2A

WFP food tonnage

230,776 mt
Cost (United States dollars)

Food and Related Costs*

432,978,886

Cash and Vouchers and Related Costs

24,848,283

Capacity Development & Augmentation

0

DSC

60,368,593

ISC

36,273,703

Total cost to WFP

554,469,464

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

On 15 December 2013 the world’s newest state descended into civil war. Although the
dispute within the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) was primarily
political, spiraling violence quickly led the SPLM and the national army (SPLA) to
split, resulting in the formation of the SPLM/A in Opposition (SPLA-IO). Several
ceasefires brokered by the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
have been violated. In August 2015 the Government and opposition leadership signed
a peace agreement containing provisions for a new ceasefire and transitionary political
and security measures. However, it remains to be seen whether this will translate into
improved security on the ground.
Over two million people have been displaced from their homes, 1.5 million people
inside South Sudan and more than 500,000 to neighboring countries1. Humanitarian
assistance contributed to reducing the number of people in the Emergency (Phase 4) in
2014, according to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC). However,
in 2015, the humanitarian community has struggled to respond at scale due to access
challenges, limited resources and insecurity.

1

UNHCR data indicates that 55 percent of refugees from South Sudan are female and 45 percent are male. Over
two thirds are children, and military age males are notably under-represented.

1

Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation remains dire and continues to worsen, with
continued high risk of a food catastrophe or even famine in some areas. According to
the 2015 IPC April projections, 4.6 million people were facing high levels of food
insecurity between May and July 2015. This marks an increase of 2.1 million
compared to December 2014. Also, nutrition surveys show malnutrition levels
exceeding emergency thresholds (15 percent) in the conflict-affected states with the
latest IPC and Food Security and Nutrition Monitoring System (FSNMS) showing 15.4
percent in Upper Nile, 19.5 percent in Jonglei and 19 percent in Unity. The latest data
from the nutrition cluster indicates that over 800,000 children are acutely malnourished
in South Sudan, of which 49 percent are boys and 51 percent are girls. The
deteriorating economy, combined with depleting household food stocks, high food
prices and long-term effects of the conflict on livelihoods, is likely to further affect
urban and rural populations. Hence, food insecurity is likely to further deteriorate both
in severity and magnitude. The current urban assessment in Juba, the Emergency Food
Security Assessment (EFSA) in Unity and the FSNMS, as well as the planned IPC
exercise in September, will help update the figures.
Under this EMOP, WFP will work with partners to provide emergency food and
nutrition assistance to 1.6 million people affected by conflict and food insecurity to
safeguard their lives and stabilize and reduce malnutrition2. WFP recognizes that
prolonged conflict and negative socio-cultural practices have affected girls and women,
boys and men differently. The response will therefore follow equity principles and will
be tailored to the needs of the most vulnerable groups.
This operation follows “Emergency Operation in Response to Conflict in South
Sudan 200659,” which focused its emergency support on the conflict affected states of
Upper Nile, Jonglei and Unity, where most of the displaced populations remained
scattered in rural and remote areas. It also extended assistance to those who sought
refuge in Protection of Civilian (PoC) sites in the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) bases and other IDP settlements in rural areas outside of the conflict
affected states. The operation targeted over 1.4 million people from 1 January 2014 –
30 September 2015.
The concurrent Protracted Relief and Recovery Operation (PRRO) 200572 focuses on
relief and recovery activities in the non-conflict affected states, and provides assistance
to refugees and those displaced from Abyei3.The co-existence and complementarity of
the two operations stems from the need to address protracted refugee needs and protect
and expand the marginal gains that have been made in addressing the underlying causes
of food insecurity and malnutrition in less conflict affected areas in recent years, while
the EMOP will focus largely on the lifesaving humanitarian needs caused directly by
the conflict.
This emergency operation will cater for increased emergency needs and will contribute
to stabilizing access to basic services. WFP will also undertake conflict sensitive
programming, striving to ensure that food assistance does not expose beneficiaries to
additional risks. Local peace building initiatives will be supported where feasible, for
example by redressing grievances of food insecure host communities in the proximity
of large refugee or displaced populations and the expansion of food for education
activities in areas of relative stability. EMOP 200859 is aligned with WFP’s Strategic
Plan 2014–2017. Specifically, WFP will use food and nutrition assistance to:
2

It is anticipated, based on current registrations, that 54 percent of the EMOP beneficiaries will be female and 46
percent will be male. Children under 5 make up approximately 20 percent of the population, and pregnant and
lactating women approximately 8 percent.
3
Of 1.7 million beneficiaries targeted under the PRRO, 44 percent are female and 56 percent are male.

2

Save lives and protect livelihoods in emergencies, in particular for displaced
and conflict-affected people, including vulnerable people whose livelihoods
and food access have been seriously compromised (Strategic Objective 1).
Restore and stabilize access to education for girls and boys in schools jointly
supported with UNICEF (Strategic Objective 1).

SITUATION ANALYSIS
Context
1. Following fighting that erupted between sections of the army in Juba in December
2013, the Greater Upper Nile Region, comprising Unity, Jonglei and Upper Nile
States, has been engulfed in conflict. Several ceasefire agreements negotiated by
IGAD have been violated.
2. In April/May 2015, hostilities in the country worsened considerably with reports of
widespread burning and destruction of towns and villages, particularly throughout
South Sudan’s Unity state. The security situation further deteriorated when a
government allied militia in Upper Nile State coordinated with the SPLM/A-IO to
launch attacks on the last functioning oil fields in the country.
3. This latest round of hostilities has seen large scale destruction and contributed to the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of people during the planting season. A peace
agreement signed by Government and opposition leadership and other parties in
August 2015 provides hope that the parties to the conflict are beginning to resolve
their differences. Yet, approximately 2 million people remain displaced, 1.5 million
of them have been displaced internally in South Sudan and over 500,000 are refugees
in neighboring countries4.
4. The crisis in South Sudan and its impact on the populations remains extremely
complex. Women and men alike have been affected by protection risks. Women and
girls are prone to resort to negative coping strategies such as transactional sex and
prostitution to obtain food. They are also often exposed to sexual and gender based
violence (SGBV) in highly militarized environments when searching for water,
firewood or food. Young men, unaccompanied males, separated children and orphans
are at risk of recruitment into armed forces. Food assistance has often been the only
means of survival for the crisis affected populations and their only way to reduce
negative coping strategies.
5. The negative impact of the conflict on the economy further exacerbates the already
desperate living conditions of millions of vulnerable South Sudanese. The
depreciation of the South Sudanese pound against the US Dollar (according to
informal market exchange rates) has contributed to rising food prices and to fuel and
food shortages. There is an acute shortage of hard currency primarily attributed to
conflict-induced reduction in oil production, decline in global oil prices, fixed
payment for use of the Sudan oil pipelines and increasing budget deficit. The
informal exchange rate has reached more than four times the official rate in recent
4

Accurate disaggregation of general population statistics by gender in South Sudan is not possible. The last
census was conducted in 2008 and not considered an accurate reflection of current situation. Based on WFP
registrations, an average of 46 percent of WFP beneficiaries are male and 54 percent are female (of which 20
percent are children under 5). Sex disaggregation by activity based on current registration data is provided in
Table 1.

3

months and the yearly rate of inflation has gone up 61.2 percent in June 2015
compared to June 2014. More recently, the Government of South Sudan has passed a
budget of USD 3.5 billion with a shortfall of approximately 2.5 billion.
The Food Security and Nutrition Situation
6. The latest IPC analysis, conducted at the end of April 2015, indicated an increase in
the number of people facing severe food insecurity from 2.5 million people in
January - March 2015 to around 4.6 million people during the lean period of May July 2015. Of these, 2 million are in the three conflict affected states.
7. The IPC analysis did not capture the large scale insecurity and ensuing displacements
in Unity and Upper Nile that took place in May/June 2015. These new shocks have
further reduced access to food for poor and displaced households, many of which
were already unable to meet basic survival needs, even with extreme coping
mechanisms. In addition, despite a timely start of the main season rainfall in these
areas, hostilities and displacement have prevented many households from planting,
which typically occurs in May and early June.
8. Significant changes in the livelihood context of rural households in the Greater Upper
Nile region have further eroded the coping strategies of affected populations.
Noteworthy is the significant decrease of the number of households that receive
income from casual labour, declining from 20 – 30 percent to merely 6 – 8 percent.
Furthermore, the continuous conflict is gradually eroding away the seasonality of
food insecurity in the three conflict affected states. The latest IPC shows only a
marginal alleviation of food insecurity following the lean season, indicating the
severe disruption of livelihoods and markets by the conflict.
9. Natural shocks such as flooding are also affecting central areas of the country,
including in the three conflict affected states. Climatic hazards further reduce food
availability and local production. The distribution of rainfall in the conflict affected
states has been erratic and not homogeneously distributed, contributing to low yields
and crop failure. Widespread flooding severely affected traders’ movements and
commodities flow to the three conflict affected states, resulting into rising prices of
the main staples in the local markets.
10. The nutrition situation in the three conflict affected states is concerning, with Global
Acute Malnutrition (GAM) in the Greater Upper Nile states remaining above the
emergency threshold (GAM >15%). GAM rates among pregnant and lactating
women (PLWs) in the Greater Upper Nile States are also critically high (GAM19.928.8%).
11. HIV infection is of concern in South Sudan. While the current HIV prevalence in
South Sudan is 2.7 percent, there are concerns that the high rates of malnutrition and
food insecurity linked to the emergency could further exacerbate the situation,
particularly when associated with additional risks of increased incidence, poor
adherence to treatment, and the related mortality. During emergencies, populations
are more vulnerable to HIV infection, especially women who are at higher risk
biologically, socially and economically. Tuberculosis is another public health concern
with a prevalence ratio of 140 cases per 100,000 people.
12. The ongoing conflict has also greatly affected the provision of basic social services
with a particularly devastating impact on children’s education. Education facilities are
not available in the host communities where people have sought refuge and there are
4

very few teachers to support some of the temporary learning spaces. Some schools
are also still occupied by armed groups. As a result an additional 400,000 children
dropped out of school. The Education Cluster reports that one year into the crisis 70
percent of schools in Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile were non-functional and nearly
1,200 schools have closed (UNICEF, 2014). According to the Ministry of Education,
Science and Technology (MoEST, 2009), 51 percent of all schools have no latrines or
drinking water source. South Sudan already had poor education indicators before
December 2013. The 2011 EMIS recorded a Gross primary enrolment (GER) of 69
percent with a net enrolment rate of 44 percent (boys 51 percent, girls 37 percent) and
a gender parity of 0.59. Less than 60 percent of teachers in South Sudan are trained
and only 13 percent of primary school teachers are female. Only 1.6 percent of
secondary school-going age females are enrolled in secondary school, and girl
enrolment in primary schools dropped to 35.4 percent (EMIS 2013).

POLICIES, CAPACITIES AND ACTIONS OF THE GOVERNMENT(S) AND OTHERS
Policies, Capacities and Actions of the Government(s)*
13. The Relief and Rehabilitation Commission (RRC) of the Government of South Sudan
coordinates preparedness and response to humanitarian crises. The RRC provides
humanitarian assistance, including food assistance, to populations displaced by
violence and flooding. However, the RRC does not yet have adequate capacity to
respond to the scale and complexity of the current humanitarian situation. Nor does it
have presence or authority in the areas of the country that remain under control of the
SPLA-IO.
14. In accordance with humanitarian principles of impartiality, neutrality and
independence, WFP and other humanitarian organizations, under the leadership of the
Humanitarian Coordinator (HC), also coordinate with the Relief Organization of
South Sudan (ROSS), the relief wing of the SPLM/A-IO.
Policies, Capacities and Actions of Other Major Actors
15. An estimated 300 organizations (UN, NGO, international organizations) are active in
South Sudan. However, many organizations were forced to suspend operations or
retract their presence from rural locations as security deteriorated. The fluid security
environment has called for organizations to adapt and consider more ‘mobile’
presence to respond to the needs in the three conflict affected states. The current
humanitarian footprint is a mixture of mobile, semi-permanent and, in few sites,
permanent presence.
16. Through the WFP-UNICEF Integrated Rapid Response Mechanism (IRRM), with
support of select NGO partners, mobile teams are deployed to hard to reach areas
with particularly alarming levels of food insecurity or acute malnutrition. They
deliver an integrated package of life-saving humanitarian relief including general
food rations, blanket and targeted supplementary feeding and vitamin A
supplementation. They also help communities to gain access to safe water and
support child access to education and child protection.
17. Through the Operational Working Group (OWG), chaired by the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), WFP and UNICEF
coordinate with the other main operational agencies. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) helps farmers, pastoralists and fishing
communities to increase their food production and income; the Office of the United
5

Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) leads assistance to refugees; and
the International Organization for Migration (IOM) provides camp management and
support for internally displaced persons (IDPs) and returnees.
18. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) focuses on four key tasks:
protection of civilians; monitoring and investigating human rights; creating enabling
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance; and supporting the
implementation of the cessation of hostilities agreement. Currently, UNMISS
provides protection to the over 140,000 internally displaced people seeking protection
within the six UNMISS Protection of Civilian (POC) sites across the country. WFP
and other humanitarian actors support assistance within the POC sites.
19. WFP continues to work closely with the Catholic Relief Services (CRS), The
Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA) and the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), all of whom manage smaller food pipelines, as well as with
other partner NGOs. Engagement with ICRC is particularly key with regard to
support for conflict-affected people.
Coordination
20. The Inter-Agency Standing Committee cluster approach is active in South Sudan and
continues its efforts to ensure that coordination mechanisms support rapid response.
WFP leads the logistics and emergency telecommunications clusters and co-leads
with FAO the food security and livelihood cluster. WFP is actively involved in the
Nutrition Cluster and uses the cluster data and analysis to determine the caseload for
the treatment of MAM and aligns nutrition interventions with the cluster strategy.
WFP operates the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service, which provides a
reliable, safe, efficient and cost-effective air transport service for the humanitarian
community in South Sudan. WFP supports these common services through three
different special operations (SOs).
21. There are numerous coordination mechanisms through which humanitarians interact
with UNMISS. WFP participates in the Civil Military Advisory Group, an interagency group working under the guidance of the HCT, to coordinate requests for
protection of humanitarian assets. Coordination mechanisms have also been
established with the Resident Coordinator Office – Recovery, Reintegration and
Peace Building (RCO-RRP), that acts as the interface for humanitarian organizations
working in UNMISS bases.

OBJECTIVES OF WFP ASSISTANCE
22. The overall objective of the EMOP is in line with WFP Strategic Objective 1 “Save
lives and protect livelihoods in emergencies”, specifically to:
Save lives, reduce severe food insecurity and stabilize the nutritional status of
high-risk groups including IDPs, conflict affected residents, women and
children (Strategic Objective 1);
Restore and stabilize access to education for girls and boys in schools jointly
supported with UNICEF (Strategic Objective 1).

BENEFICIARIES AND TARGETING
23. This EMOP will focus on two main groups: (i) conflict-affected populations
comprising IDPs in UNMISS POC sites and rural areas, and (ii) food-insecure
6

residents in the Greater Upper Nile region who are affected by the conflict due to
their role as host families for the displaced, the destruction of their livelihoods or the
disruption of food availability or accessibility. Other specific demographic groups
include: children 6-59 months, pregnant and lactating women (PLW), and primary
school-age children in conflict-affected areas. These groups are specifically targeted
due to their limited decision-making power and nutritional vulnerability to risks
associated with conflict and violence as well as their critical role in the future of the
country.
24. Given the nature of the crisis and displacement patterns, it is extremely difficult to
distinguish between host and IDP populations during registration processes. Further,
the prolonged conflict, the impact on markets, the disruption of livelihood activities
and the continued depletion of household assets have diminished the gap between
most IDP and host communities in the three conflict affected states. Based on food
security projections, WFP will target 1.44 million conflict affected residents and IDPs
in rural areas through GFD in the three conflict affected states. This includes
population groups projected to be in Phase 4 – Emergency, and those with poor food
consumption scores in Phase 3 – Crisis5. Budget and capacity constraints will prevent
WFP from reaching the remaining food-insecure residents. WFP will however
continue advocating with other partners in the Food Security and Livelihoods Cluster,
to ensure some form of assistance for these people.
25. County level targeting for GFD within the three conflict affected states is based on
data from IPC Analysis, the FSNMS and nutrition cluster Standardised Monitoring
and Assessment of Relief and Transition (SMART) surveys. Further prioritization is
conducted based on qualitative and quantitative data obtained during assessment
missions. Prioritization within the county considers additional variables such as
recent exposure to shocks (floods, disease outbreaks, repeated violence and attacks),
dietary diversity and food consumption scores.
26. The number of people seeking refuge in the UNMISS POC sites continues to
increase, particularly in the front-line towns of Bentiu and Malakal. Currently, over
200,000 IDPs reside in the UNMISS POC sites of Juba, Bor, Bentiu, Malakal, Wau
and Melut6. These IDPs will be targeted based on their food security status with a
combination of food and cash-based transfers, as appropriate.
27. Targeted Supplementary Feeding (TSFP) will cover 152,000 moderately
malnourished children and 50,000 malnourished PLW. Given high GAM rates among
children under five, a total of 295,330 children aged 6-59 months will be reached
through blanket supplementary feeding (BSFP). The BSFP will be linked to the
provision of GFD to allow for wider coverage and to meet the additional nutrient
needs of vulnerable groups, therefore preventing them from becoming acutely
malnourished. Due to the complexity of identifying the right beneficiaries in
emergency situations, BSFP for 62,542 PLWs will only be conducted in areas with
partner presence. Where possible, TSFP and BSFP will be implemented in the same
areas to ensure the continuum of treatment and prevention of acute malnutrition.
Individual targeting criteria for nutrition programmes are based on standard
anthropometric measurements for TSFP (weight-for-height and mid-upper arm
circumference) and on age or physiological state for BSFP (6-59 months, PLWs).
28. Access to education for boys and girls in complex emergencies and transitional
settings is critical to mitigate the disruption posed by conflict to education, and the
resulting high dropout rates and low enrolment rates. Emergency school feeding
(ESF) will aim to provide stability, structure and routines that helps children to cope
5
6

Approximately 41 percent of those projected to be in Phase 3 – Crisis.
Approximately 55 percent of the POC population is female and 45 percent is male.

7

with stress, trauma and violence. School attendance also contributes to protection as
it reduces exposure to forced recruitment, gender based violence, child labour and
early marriage. Other objectives include supporting the right to education by
widening access, promoting gender equality and ensuring equity. In a 2015
publication, UN Women and the Inter Agency Standing Committee confirmed that
school feeding in humanitarian contexts can increase access to education for girls.
The current statistics in South Sudan indicate that boys are six more times likely to be
in school in comparison to girls even in conflict affected states. WFP’s intervention
will target 26,500 girls and 23,500 boys under the age of 18 years. WFP, in
collaboration with UNICEF as part of the “back to learning campaign” will seek to
promote values of inclusion, peaceful co-existence and gender equality as part of
WFP’s commitment as outlined in the Humanitarian Protection and Gender Policy.
Blanket deworming will be implemented in November 2015 and in May 2016
alongside hygiene education. Where possible, complementary activities will include
the improvement of school latrines and hand-washing facilities, the provision of
water points, school gardens and the installation of fuel-efficient stoves.
29. Targeting for the emergency school feeding programme will be based on food
security and education indicators. Due to potential violence and continued hostilities
in conflict affected states, WFP will ensure that the physical environment of the
schools are safe and children are protected. Interventions will include a) enforcing a
code of conduct among teachers to prevent child abuse, b) attainment of commitment
by authorities to ensure safety of children, c) the establishment of emergency
procedures and practices, and d) particular attention to the most vulnerable such as
children with caregivers affected by HIV/AIDS, orphans and unaccompanied
children. The cost per child per year of the emergency school feeding programme is
USD 74.35.
30. The Institutional Feeding Programme will provide a general food ration to 5,000
TB/HIV/Leprosy/Kalazar patients and caretakers, including mothers of severely acute
malnourished (SAM) children in stabilization centers. Food assistance to these will
contribute to increased access to care and adherence to treatment, and to reduced
default rates of the programme. A planned assessment will determine the potential for
a shift in the HIV programme, from a focus on defaulting to a more comprehensive
care and treatment model.
31. Cost-efficiency analysis indicates that cash-based transfers are less efficient than inkind food and there is a risk that inefficiency could increase in light of the
deteriorating economic situation. Cash-based transfers have however other benefits as
they facilitate dietary diversity and dignity and they stimulate local economies. Cashbased transfers for IDPs will be used where markets have adequate supplies and can
respond to increased demand, as ascertained by supply chain and VAM assessments.
Building on the current experience, cash-based transfers will be expanded in the IDP
settlement in Mingakman and in the Juba UNMISS POC sites, which are located near
main markets and reachable by several corridors (road and river). In these sites,
150,000 beneficiaries will receive 70 percent of their cereal entitlements through a
cash-based transfer. WFP will implement SCOPE[1], which will strengthen the
database management system for beneficiaries. Given the volatile economic situation
in the country, WFP will continue to monitor markets and maintain contingency plans
for switching transfer modalities should a sudden change in context occur.
32. Targeting and site selection will be informed by a context, gender and protection risk
analysis so that food assistance supports the protection of the conflict affected
populations, and does not expose them to further harm. This includes: (i) providing
8

assistance in rural areas outside of UNMISS POC sites in a way that doesn’t expose
affected populations to further protection risks. Such risks include sexual and gender
based violence when women and men attempt to access assistance as well as other
necessities, such as charcoal or firewood, ii) ensuring that risks such as forced
recruitment of children are prevented when large populations gather to receive food
assistance, (iv) ensuring access to food assistance for the most marginalized and
vulnerable groups, and (v) ensuring that food assistance does not exacerbate tension
between different social groups. As part of WFP enhanced commitments to
Accountability to Affected Populations (AAP), operational decisions will be led by
the communities’ perception of the implications of assistance on their safety, and by
WFP’s and partners’ analysis. WFP will collaborate closely with UNMISS with
regard to their efforts to secure humanitarian access and increase presence and
patrolling in areas outside UNMISS bases, taking into consideration the IASC
Principles Paper on “UN Integration and Humanitarian Space.”

TABLE 1: BENEFICIARIES BY ACTIVITY

Activity

GFD

Boys/Men

Girls/Women

Total

660,053

744,315

1,404,368

70,500

79,500

150,000

138,805

156,525

295,330

0

62,542

62,542

BSFP(CNVs)

1,855

2,092

3,947

TSFP(CNVs)

1,429

1,611

3,040

0

50,000

50,000

71,440

80,560

152,000

0

5,000

5,000

752

848

1,600

IFP(Caretakers)

0

1,600

1,600

IFP(Outpatient)

846

954

1,800

ESF

23,500

26,500

50,000

Total

969,180

1,212,047

2,181,227

* Unique Ben

765,999

887,385

1,653,384

GFD-Cash & Vouchers
BSFP(CH<5)
BSFP(PLW)

TSFP(PLW)
TSFP(CH<5)
TFP(Caretakers)

IFP(Inpatient)

* Unique Beneficiaries excluding overlap between activities (1.BSFP: 100% overlaped2.TSFP:60% overlapped
3.FFE:80% Overlapped)

Nutritional Considerations and Rations / Value of Cash / Voucher Transfers
33. Conflict-affected persons and populations in PoCs and displacement sites will receive
a standard GFD ration of cereal (sorghum or maize), pulses, oil and salt that meets the
9

daily requirement of 2,131 kcal/person/day. The value of cash-based transfers will be
based on the cost of a local nutritious diet.
34. Children aged 6–59 months will receive SuperCereal Plus through the BSF
programme. Plumpy Sup’ will be used to treat children aged 6–59 months suffering
from MAM. PLW will receive a ration of SuperCereal, oil and sugar for both BSFP
and TSFP. Given the logistics and transport challenges, WFP will attempt to prioritise
the use of SuperCereal pre-sweetened with sugar for PLW.
35. The ration for emergency school feeding is 120g cereal, 30g pulses, 4g double
fortified salt, 10g oil and is based on a half-day school schedule. The ration provides
598 kcal a day.
36. For assistance in urban environments, WFP will undertake market assessments to
ascertain if cash-based transfers can be implemented in lieu of or in addition to food
commodities. Assessments will include an analysis of potential gender based violence
and protection risks linked to in-kind and cash-based transfers.
TABLE 2: FOOD RATION/ TRANSFER BY ACTIVITY

(g/person/day)

GFD

BSFP
(CH<5)

TSFP
(CH<5)

PLW

CNVs

FFE

IFP(In/Out
patient)

Care
Taker

0

0

0
0
30
0
20
250

225
25
15
2
0
0

120
30
10
4
0
0

450
50
30
5
30
50

450
50
30
5
0
0

Cereals

500

Pulses

50

Oil

30

Salt

5

Sugar

0

SuperCereal+

0

0
0
0
0
0
0

SuperCereal++

0

200

0

0

0

0

0

0

Plumpy Sup

0

0

92

0

0

0

0

0

0.365

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

585
2,131

200
787

92

300

267

164

615

535

492

1,327

980

598

2,267

1,961

12.7%

16.6%

10.5%

12.3%

12.6%

13.5%

12.3%

12.6%

19.9%

23.2%

59.0%

37.6%

20.9%

21.6%

19.7%

20.9%

**252

360

60

360

144

196

360

360

*Cash/voucher
(US$/person/day)
Total
Total kcal/day
% kcal from
protein[1]
% kcal from fat
Number of feeding
days per year or per
month (as applicable)

0
0
0
0

*Cash/voucher value of compensating in-kind 500g/p/d of cereal in POCs and Mingkaman
** Total requirements are based on 21 feeding days (rather than 30) per month, due to access and security
challenges based on experience to date.

10

TABLE 3: TOTAL FOOD/CASH AND VOUCHER REQUIREMENTS BY ACTIVITY (mt)
Commod
ity Type/
Cash &
voucher

GFD

Cereals

166,623

0

0

0

0

Pulses

16,662
9,997
1,666
0

2,700
1,620
270
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
793
0
529

25
15
2
0

0

0

0

0 6,612

0

0

20,143

0

0

0

0

0

$19,71
0,000

0

Oil
Salt
Sugar
SuperC
ereal+
SuperC
ereal++
Plumpy
Sub
Cash/vo
ucher
(US$)
Total

GFDCASH

194,949

TSFP
(CH<5)

BSFP (CH<5)

4,590

20,143

PLW

CNVs

IFP(In/Out
patient)

FFE

Total (mt or
US$)

46

119

168,190

294
98
39
0

5
3
1
3

13
8
1
0

19,700
12,535
1,979
532

0

0

5

0

6,617

0

0

0

0

0

20,143

1,080

0

0

0

0

0

1,080

0

0

0

0

0

0

$19,710,0
00

1,080

7,934

226 1,176

Care
Taker

269

1,607

63

141

230,776

IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
Participation
37. WFP’s chief accountability lies with the crisis affected, food insecure population.
WFP in South Sudan presents its objectives transparently to beneficiaries and nonbeneficiary communities as well as to local authorities, civil society stakeholders and
others. Particular efforts are made to enable the consultation and participation of
vulnerable groups as well as understanding communities’ preferences on safe and
accessible channels for communicating complaints and feedback.
38. Civil society stakeholders, traditional and local authorities, and to the extent possible
particular vulnerable groups are consulted and participate throughout the project
activity. Where feasible, Food Management Committees will be formed.
Consultations enable WFP to understand the specific needs, protection risks and selfprotection strategies of affected communities in the context of food assistance
programming.
39. WFP has also established a Complaint and Feedback Mechanism (CFM) for the
market based operations. Help desks are set up during distributions, market
monitoring informs decisions, and a hotline has been created for both beneficiaries
and traders. WFP has also setup an online CFM reporting interface accessible to
partners. Efforts will be made to expand CFM to other beneficiary groups, including
11

in rural areas. WFP and partners consult extensively with communities and
authorities prior to and during the provision of assistance as part of AAP
commitments. However, remoteness, insecurity and a lack of permanent UN and
NGO presence pose challenges to implementing comprehensive CFM in many
locations.

Partners and Capacities
40. The humanitarian community in South Sudan suffered widespread loss of assets and
infrastructure after the outbreak of conflict. The operating environment also
drastically changed and demanded greater oversight, risk management and the need
for inclusive conflict and political economy analysis. It was also clear that securing
the needed humanitarian access and space was going to be challenging for each
individual partner. Since the outbreak of the conflict, WFP has worked with partners
to strengthen their capacities, particularly in risk management and protection, to
ensure continued presence and a principled response.
41. The IRRM has allowed WFP and partners to scale up operations in remote and hard
to access areas. This has resulted in restored confidence of a wider array of
humanitarians who have returned to work in these areas. Over the course of the
emergency, partners have increasingly assumed functions related to registration,
coordination of airdrops and airlifts, and distribution. WFP is regularly reviewing
partners’ capacities to identify bottlenecks to further scale up, and is increasing its
support to cooperating partners to sustain their mobile and semi-mobile teams. WFP
also conducts direct deep field distribution and process and outcome monitoring.
42. As part of the WFP-UNICEF nutrition strategy, when possible mobile teams include
trained nutritionists that oversee the rapid screening for MAM and SAM of children
aged 6-59 months at distribution sites. Mobile teams also provide immediate on-site
TSFP assistance to MAM children aged 6-59 months with a minimum of 30 days
assistance. In the conflict affected states, WFP is working with over 25 partners to
provide continued TSFP programme at TSFP centres.
Procurement
43. WFP expects to procure 85 percent of the food and nutrition commodities for this
emergency operation internationally, and 15 percent regionally. Food and non-food
items in support of the operation will be purchased in accordance with standard WFP
procurement procedures.
44. The project is expected to draw from Forward Purchasing Facility (FPF) stocks in the
Djibouti and Mombasa corridors.
Logistics
45. The main seaports to South Sudan are Mombasa port in Kenya and Port Sudan,
situated on the Red Sea coast of Sudan. Djibouti Port has also become vital as it not
only provides the opportunity to reach certain places within Upper Nile State through
Ethiopia, but also serves the air operations conducted out of Ethiopia for the three
conflict affected states.
46. WFP’s logistics strategy in South Sudan is based on an in-depth risk and context
analysis. While physical accessibility has always been challenging in South Sudan,
the security situation, particularly in the dry season, does not allow the use of
traditional roads in the three conflict affected states. The risks of looting of
12

prepositioned food is considered unacceptable in most locations in the Greater Upper
Nile region.
47. Drawing upon experience from 2014 and 2015, WFP will need to transport
approximately 7500 mt per month by air from Juba, Wau or a staging area outside
South Sudan7. Depending on the availability of drop zones, and on the feasibility of
securing safe air corridors, WFP will deploy a mixture of airdrop aircrafts and
helicopters to move food where prepositioning is not feasible, or where risk of road
movements is too high.
48. Where appropriate, WFP will seek to conduct prepositioning in two stages, first to
strategic logistics hubs within the country, namely Bor, Rumbek, Wunrok, Malakal
and Juba, and then to 15 to 20 forward prepositioning sites. These sites will be
reviewed to access their future viability.
49. Commercial river transport will be used to deliver food into Malakal and Melut from
Bor and Juba ports or Kosti port in Sudan when viable.
50. The overall landside transport, storage and handling (LTSH) costs are US$295.7
million, equivalent to a rate of US$1,256 per mt. The current rate is based on the
assumption that the Sudan-South Sudan and Ethiopia-South Sudan border will remain
open. Should requirements in areas that are cut off during the rainy season decrease,
or new areas become accessible by surface transport, WFP will adjust the LTSH rates
accordingly.

PERFORMANCE MONITORING
51. WFP collaborates with partners in monitoring outputs, processes and outcomes. Data
is collected by trained staff of cooperating partners and WFP sub-offices, and by a
country office roving team. While WFP endeavors to collect outcome data directly,
insecurity often constraints direct access to beneficiaries. WFP will contract private
companies or NGOs for third-party monitoring in areas where security clearances
cannot be obtained. Data collected will be analysed and triangulated with other
sources to measure progress and take corrective actions. This analysis will also
determine requirements for further capacity building of partners, purposive sampling
when monitoring, and for determining corrective actions for non-compliant
stakeholders.
52. The country office has rolled out COMET, the corporate monitoring database which
links outcome and output results together with planning figures. This tool will
enhance the ability of WFP to provide evidence-based data for achievements while
also enabling the country office to more easily track project plans against various
funding scenarios and signed partnership agreements. This ability will improve
corporate reporting and programmatic decision making.
53. Nutrition outcomes will be assessed through data collected from monthly clinic
registers, post distribution outcome monitoring, and the SMART surveys generated
by the Nutrition Cluster.
54. Cross-cutting indicators

for gender, protection and accountability to affected
populations as well as food security and livelihood outcome indicators will be

7

Current preferred staging location are Jimma, and Gambella, Ethiopia.

13

measured through FSNMS. Post distribution outcome monitoring will provide
supplemental information where data is not representative or insufficient.

HAND-OVER STRATEGY
55. As opportunities for recovery present themselves in areas where the conflict has
abated, the existing PRRO will be used as a vehicle to implement more medium-term
activities to support community resilience and livelihoods and reduce under nutrition.
This will allow the continuation of progress made since independence for
communities in more stable areas while ensuring urgent humanitarian assistance in
response to acute needs. Pending a political resolution to the current crisis, WFP
hopes to conclude the EMOP and revert to combined relief and recovery
interventions, including capacity augmentation, under the PRRO.

RISK MANAGEMENT
56. The EMOP is subject to a number of contextual, programmatic and institutional risks
for which mitigation measures are being taken. The main risks and mitigation
measures are described below:
Contextual Risks
57. Further escalation of the conflict would likely result in increased food insecurity and
displacement while humanitarian access and space may become further restricted.
The limited humanitarian access affects the ability of WFP and partners from
reaching beneficiaries. WFP is mitigating this through a multi-tiered access strategy:
i) continuing to work closely with the government, cooperating partners and OCHA
to ensure access to beneficiaries through advocacy, sensitization and other measures;
ii) strengthening the capacity of its office and partners to expand large-scale mobile
operations; and iii)mitigating access constraints caused by poor transport
infrastructure through prepositioning, use of airdrops, and river transport where
feasible and appropriate.
58. The lack of resolution to the current conflict and the ensuing economic situation may
reduce food supply, increase food prices and further erode household purchasing
power. Through the weekly price monitoring system and the FSNMS, WFP will
continue to closely monitor urban food insecurity to review programme modalities
and scale of operations against evolving needs.

Programmatic Risks
59. There is an increased risk of WFP and partners not being able to reach conflictaffected populations in a timely manner as a result of shrinking humanitarian access
and space in active conflict areas. To prevent negative impacts on the nutritional and
health status of conflict-affected populations, WFP is identifying potential partners
with the capacity to deliver WFP assistance in these areas, while it also continues to
negotiate and advocate for unhindered humanitarian access. To build partner capacity
and interest, WFP will organize a series of capacity-building workshops and activities
for NGO partners. Where insecurity or lack of partners do not allow for a response,
WFP will advocate with other actors to meet the needs. WFP will also continue to
14

maintain its mobile response capacity and will retain the ability to augment responses
in the event that partners may not meet their commitments.
60. The availability of quality data in South Sudan and the challenges of collecting it,
pose risks to WFP in assessing and demonstrating the efficacy of programmatic
interventions. WFP will invest in monitoring and data collection systems, including
through additional capacity at the sub-office level and also engaging a third party to
expand monitoring coverage.
61. Enlisting a third party to monitor WFP activities in inaccessible areas may heighten
exposure to the risk of fraud, corruption and collusive practices. Another key risk is
that WFP becomes further removed from its populations of concern. To minimize
these risks, WFP will ensure due diligence and thorough background checks during
the selection process. Any conflicts of interest by the potential third party will be
declared. Data collected by third parties will be protected through on-site electronic
uploading via tablets and through a contractual clause stating ownership by WFP,
thus enforcing confidentiality of beneficiary identities and responses. In addition,
potential third parties will submit their own risk analysis and mitigation measures
through the proposal process.
62. The deteriorating economic situation poses programmatic risks. This is notably the
case for cash-based transfers, which are already less efficient than in-kind transfers
due to the rising cost of food, combined with the rising difference between the official
and unofficial market exchange rates. WFP will closely monitor markets and will
adjust the levels of cash based transfers vis-à-vis in kind assistance, in order to
achieve maximum efficiency while taking into account the broader benefits of
market-based responses.
63. Rising levels of need within an increasingly constrained funding environment poses
the risk that WFP will not be sufficiently resourced to meet all the needs outlined in
the project. This will require needs–based prioritization to ensure that available
resources are targeted to the most vulnerable communities. WFP will collect and use
available food security and nutrition information, alongside broader contextual
analysis of conflict and displacement, in order to determine which locations to
prioritize.

Institutional Risks
64. The lack of immediate and adequate funding would hinder WFP’s ability to meet the
needs of the targeted population under this EMOP. Operational shortfalls and pipeline
breaks may also damage WFP’s reputation and relationship with local communities.
To mitigate this risk, the country office has significantly augmented its fundraising
activities and staff capacity.
65. In most areas targeted under this EMOP, particularly those affected by conflict, there
is risk of looting and theft of WFP food and direct threats to staff safety and security.
WFP continues to monitor and analyze local security conditions and ensures that
operations are fully compliant with all security regulations and that all staff have
taken the mandatory security awareness training. WFP also conducts direct access
negotiations and will further enhance its activities to increase WFP acceptability
amongst communities.
66. The current number of concurrent corporate emergencies has increased pressure on
staff available to support operations. As a result, the South Sudan operations relied in
15

some instances on short-term staffing arrangements. This risk will be mitigated
through establishing and recruiting for fixed term posts, while also supporting
corporate efforts to incentivize internal reassignments to South Sudan. Investments in
staff wellness also increase the attractiveness of South Sudan as a duty station.
67. The mitigation measures taken by WFP against these risks are elaborated in the WFP
South Sudan Risk Register, which will be reviewed and updated in early 2016.
Security Risk Management
68. According to the Security Level System of the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security (UNDSS), all areas that this EMOP will target are either under level
three or four. The United Nations South Sudan Security Category System, unique to
South Sudan, tracks the security situation at the local level and informs WFP standard
operating procedures in specific locations.
69. WFP continuously updates security management plans, contingency plans and
standard operating procedures as part of the overall United Nations Security Services
Work Plan for South Sudan. WFP has a stringent MOSS compliance implementation
tracking system in place to ensure effective implementation and identified mitigation
measures.

RECOMMENDATION

APPROVAL

…………………………

…………………………….

Ertharin Cousin

José Graziano da Silva
Director-General, FAO
Date:………………………

Executive Director, WFP
Date: … … … … … … …

16

ANNEX I-A
PROJECT COST BREAKDOWN
Quantity
(mt)

Value
(US$)

Value
(US$)

Food Transfers
Cereals

168,190

44,384,290

Pulses

19,700

12,483,636

Oil and fats

12,535

12,359,947

Mixed and blended food

27,840

23,401,496

2,511

435,278

230,776

93,064,646

Others
Total Food Transfers
External Transport

21,522,214

LTSH

288,486,672

ODOC Food

29,905,354

Food and Related Costs 8

432,978,886

C&V Transfers

19,710,000

C&V Related costs

5,138,283

Cash and Vouchers and Related Costs
Capacity Development & Augmentation
Direct Operational Costs

Total Direct Project Costs

9

60,368,593
518,195,761

9

TOTAL WFP COSTS

8

457,827,168

Direct support costs (see Annex I-B)

Indirect support costs (7.0 percent)

24,848,283

36,273,703
554,469,464

This is a notional food basket for budgeting and approval. The contents may vary.
The indirect support cost rate may be amended by the Board during the project.

17

ANNEX I-B
DIRECT SUPPORT REQUIREMENTS (US$)
WFP Staff and Staff-Related
Professional staff

16,697,476

*
**

General service staff
Danger pay and local allowances
Subtotal
Recurring and Other

7,831,044
3,326,339
27,854,859
13,183,102

Capital Equipment

6,633,000

Security

3,937,000

Travel and transportation

8,460,632

Assessments, Evaluations and Monitoring10
TOTAL DIRECT SUPPORT COSTS

300,000
60,368,593

10

Reflects estimated costs when these activities are performed by third parties. If WFP Country Office staff
perform these activities, the costs are included in Staff and Staff Related and Travel and Transportation.

18

19

ANNEX III

20

21

ACRONYMS USED IN THE DOCUMENT
AAP

Accountability to affected populations

ACTED

Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development

AGF

Anti-Government Forces

BSFP

Blanket Supplementary Feeding Programme

CFM

Complaints and Feedback Mechanism

CO

Country Office

EFSA

Emergency Food Security Assessment

EMOP

Emergency Operation

ESF

Emergency School Feeding

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

FFA

Food for Assets

FLAs

Field Level Agreements

FPF

Forward Purchase Facility

FSNMS

Food Security and Nutrition Monitoring System

GAM

Global Acute Malnutrition

GFD

General Food Distribution

ICRC

International Committee of the Red Cross

IDPs

Internally Displaced Persons

IGAD

Inter-Governmental Authority on Development

IPC

Integrated Food Security Phase Classification

IOM

International Organization for Migration

IR

Immediate Response

IRRM

Integrated Rapid Response Mechanism

JAM

Joint Action Management

LTSH

Landslide, transport, storage and handling

MAM

Moderate Acute Malnutrition

MORSS

Minimum Operating Residential Security Standards

MOSS

Minimum Operating Security Standards

NGO

Non-Governmental Organizations

OCHA

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

PoC

Protection of Civilian

P4P

Purchase for Progress
22

PDM

Post Distribution Monitoring

PLW

Pregnant and Lactating Women

PRRO

Protracted Relief and Recovery Operation

ROSS

Relief Organization of South Sudan

RRC

Relief and Rehabilitation Commission

SAM

Severe Acute Malnutrition

SGBV

Sexual and Gender Based Violence

SMART

Standardized Monitoring and Assessment of Relief and Transition

SO

Special Operation

SPLA/M

Sudan People’s Liberation Movement

TPM

Third Party Monitoring

TSFP

Targeted Supplementary Feeding Programme

UNDSS

United Nations Department of Safety and Security

UNHAS

United Nations Humanitarian Air Services

UNMISS

United Nations Mission in South Sudan

UNHCR

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

UNICEF

United Nations Children’s Fund

23

ANNEX IV - LTSH-matrix
ANNEX V - Project Budget Plan
ANNEX VI - Project Statistics
ANNEX VII - Project Budget Estimate

24

